: um, i don’t know. i don’t really, i don’t really, you know, feel like there's a piece, a single piece of work or anything like that. for me, it’s more about the process. yeah.
 : like in what way?
 : mhm. : well, i guess i don’t really prioritize in that way. like i don’t really... i mean i make a very wide range of works. and there are pieces that take five years to make—there are pieces that take a month to make. um you know there are things that are instantaneous like photographs. there are other things which are time based or process based that are, you know, have a great deal of complexity. so, for myself, i see it in a way where it is not about – it’s not a linear journey. it isn’t one thing leading to another, so for that reason, i don’t really. i kind of democratize what i do. i don't see that there's, you know, there is this piece i did called [piece 1] at the [museum 1] in [city 1] is actually more important than a sculpture that we're making right now. for me, it’s very kind of radiocentrific.
 : i think there are different ways to know. you work on something until you can’t work on it anymore. um, you know. that that process is more in line i think with a medium like film where, you can, there are so many layers from, you know, filming everything, to editing everything, to the sound, to finally reaching a point to where the sound - you just can't, you - there's no more changes to be made. so, a piece kind of makes itself. that that does happen. that is not uncommon with certain projects too. the projects --  the the thing you're making - kind of takes over and it starts creating its own language and you kind of become almost like you're there to enable it to exist in a way. and um, so, yeah, but that's probably all subjective.
 : well, i think if you know completely, then you shouldn’t start it. um, you know i think it's -laughs- i think that the reason you would make anything is because of that sense of discovery. that sense of, you know, engaging in something that that might somehow take you into a place that is unexpected or unknown or or you know, will reveal something that you haven't been aware of before.  so you know, i have always been, you know, i have always been, for example, you know, hitchcock would say that he would write the script and he would storyboard it fanatically, like every single scene and he always said how boring it was to make the movie because he was just illustrating the storyboards, and for me i'm in complete disagreement with that. i think that if you reach that point then you know, it's dead. it’s dead already. if you're illustrating something, so.
 : -laughs- : um...i don’t really know...um, i don’t know. i mean i have kind of always made things and have always - i think the things that i do, whatever medium or whenever they're made, you know, i kind of pushed those things pretty hard, you know what i make, just internally. so, you know i don’t know if that has any influence to it, but i don’t find myself satisfied um, satisfied very often with, you know, you can see things that sometimes look ok. they have potential to go further and that's something that i've always been interested in. i've always been interested in also in making works and pushing them to a point where they break, they become complete failures and then seeing what can come out of the failure, like you keep going past that and see what happens then.
 : um i mean, yesterday, there are these kind of large, they're like paintings but they're not. they're like these huge slabs that are like eight feet by six feet or something and, you know, they require like different paints and colors on them or something like that. you know, one of these pieces, you know, i've kind of taken to the moon and back. i've done all these things to it and, you know, the guys at work, they get frustrated because i keep taking the same piece  and just doing like repainting it completely or dropping a new image in it, you know, but it's just a form and uh, that piece, you know yesterday i think we finally hit on something but it had all of these iterations before that, like it could have been like ten different pieces if we had just stopped and made another on, you know. but, i think that, you know i recognize that branch of work that, you know, that's kind one of many things we're doing right now, but that branch of work, it needed to, it's it's the way i can legitimize making that body of work was to just see it as experimentation, like i needed to kind of grow in that direction, so i saw these things as being, you know, not about a finished thing but being about um, about continuously pushing it and like letting it collapse and trying to rebuild it and push it. you know, i saw that as a way of accelerated growth, um you know because i could kind of take that and, you know, with a lot um of ramifications, i could kind of do that on my own in the studio with a few people just over and over and like find new ways of, you know, solving those problems. 
 : well, it’s both. : i think it's both in a way. i think in a lot of ways there are projects where, you know, there is an idea or question at the beginning of the project and that, that you know is what transforms it from being a project into being, you know, something that we're, you know, you’re with twenty people in the middle of [country 1] filming for months to go working forty-eight hours a day kind of, like like some projects reach very extreme situations that i do. you know, some it's location whether it's in [country 2] in the former location of [temple 1] mass suicide or in [country 3] in the diamond mines or you know, in [country 4] or [country 5] in the film industry there or like making the pieces that are very outward. and then there are other projects that we don’t need to go outward. we can, you know, film them in [city 2] or in a studio or they are, you know, architectural. um, so yeah. : \you know was everyone in it really kind of was able to talk about what they do by talking about the process. instead of talking about what they make. instead of saying like, i'm [architect], i make buildings that are like this, it was much more about the cross-pollination, i think of many things. whether there's many different forms within the arts or whether there’ that's nothing to do with the arts at all and having a good conversation with a somalian taxi driver on the way home, you know. so\interviwer: yeah. yeah.: \i think that's a really um... that's kind of the, um, the short sightedness that i found in [city 3: where there was a creativity conference] was how limited the people's view of creativity was. you know, it was so, everyone was looking for this kind of this convenient formula and a way they could kind of quantify it when, you know, i don't think it really is anything like that at all. i think it’s it’s you know, environmental and it's it’s internal, it's it’s the randomness of encounters and, you know, the juxtaposition of, you know, things that you're going to put together that i would never think of, um you know, so. : um, lot of obstacles -laughs- i think sometimes, you know, sometimes the obstacle makes the work. i think sometimes that, you know, sometimes you you kind of set out to make works that, you know, you think are nearly impossible to pull off and but you kind of have this belief in it and you keep chipping away like, you know, i mean.  i don't know, like wha- like maybe, (noise of participant getting out a book on his work)... i kind of go through here…i mean this was, talk about obstacles, this was this house. um, you know\

interviewer: yeah.

: \this house, you know, i lived in this location for a long time and here where we are right now. eventually, i was able to get the house and then i um we choreographed the reconstruction of the house. i brought my mother and my father down every day for seven days to sit motionless inside of it while we, you know day one like the ceiling goes down or the windows or the walls and eventually, you know in this film, this house comes down to nothing. this is kind of where we're sitting right now -laughs- and then the debris of that kind of goes into the museum with the film and there is nothing, so then this place is uh kind of a reinvention of the site. so, i think that everything becomes porous, like everything around you becomes a possibility to become something, like in the situation, i wanted to make this work. i also realized that my house was like absolutely collapsing, you know. i could have fixed it up or something, but i just thought this would be really a great time to, you know, make this work about entropy and change and disintegration, and, you know, and to like fold it into my own life and then wiped this place clean, which is here, and built this place. you know, here's this house and inside, that's a vision space\ : \and um, and made it my own (shows him the house)
 : how do you mean? well, you're a psychologist, -laughs- i'll ask you! : um i think.

interviewer: can you tell me more about that?
: i don't really know, you know. i don't really know about that, that project. it just seemed like the right thing. it just seemed like the perfect combination, the perfect storm, so to speak. to have them - i never, you know, my pieces are not heavily autobiographical and i don't really see that piece as being either, in a way.  i feel like detached from it, but it was about this idea... this idea about place and individual and the idea of change and erosion. : um, there is a lot of like, you know, my career, i mean if i can even call it that, has had lot of like, jogs or kind of like strange moments where like, um you know, it's like a right angle all of a sudden. so yeah, i can think of when i was younger i can think of - i was always making things like just as much as i could, and not, you know, just drawing or something like that, which i did love to do, but also if i could find some trash i would turn it into a collage. i’d you know, i'd be outside and find something and just mold it into something. and i never really i never really kind of - i never saw that creativity had anything to do with mediums. it was never for me, like, you choose your medium like you're a painter, your friends a photographer or something like that. i just never, i just never kind of grew up thinking of it that way. i felt like, you know, well you want to learn all of these different things so you can make things with those tools, you know. you borrow a camera so you can figure out how to take photos and, you know, it's night time and it's too dark to take photos so you figure out how you shoot at night time. so you do long exposures and you bring in light. you know, you just kind of freestyling it and all of these worlds start opening up. so, i was always like that. i was fortunate when i was really young to um have a lot of exposure to culture, um you know, but not in a beat you over the head kind of way. i just had mother and father that were really, um, you know, they're huge voracious readers and they're -clears throat- obsessed with traveling to kind of strange places. not when i say travel, i don't mean the [city 4] travel to the four seasons or something like that, i mean i’m sorry, -laughs- uh, sorry, i mean the [city 5] travel - laughs-.

interviewer: -laughs-: i mean the possibility of travel. but, you know, like save up whatever money you have and go to the amazon for two months, or go to like russia during the cold war and these places like that. you know, it was kind of this combination of this intense curiosity and this idea that culture was kind of, you know, what was made, you know, they're more into literature and films, like that set the bar for like the value of what you do. you know.
 : water? yeah, okay. (pours glass of water)
 : there's been kind of certain projects that have been kind of uh like anchor points, um, yeah.
 : um, probably a piece i can think of immediately, let me see if there is an image in here or something, um, (turns pages of book) when you were talking about kind of past projects, like this last year we made um this book and some other things that were kind of like monographs or archives or things like that. i had um, it was weird because pretty much i was forced to make this book and right now we're organizing a series of like retrospective shows and that kind of stuff and i always avoided that. like, every time someone wanted to do a book, and i've done like twelve books or something like that, i would hijack the opportunity and make an artist book, like make a new book of some idea, and they would be like no, no we want a book that's like an archive.  i'd be like nah, we'll make this instead, you know. and the museum thing's the same thing. someone wanted to do a museum show, so i just saw it as an opportunity to make a new work, like i would abort mission when it came to like putting pieces together. but, i kind of got into the situation where i had to confront this past stuff probably in the last year or two to\ 
 : \and it had never been photographed or shot or anything. and i wanted to pick this piece, like this psychological landscape of whatever we found inside. so, it wasn't film that we were looking to make, it was literally like allowing the landscape to kind of speak and the parameters, the fence and ocean that closed it off, like become the restriction of the narrative. so, everything inside just became the narrative. so, we went up there and spent like a month, a month and a half inside, and all of these images are from it.\ 

interviewer: huh.

: \ghost towns inside left over from the 1900s from germans. you know, abandoned mines from the turn of the century.\ 

interviewer: wow.


: but, as you know, you would see no humans. : there was just no one there. it was a very um surreal process but it was also a fitzcarraldo like process where it was like in the sense i had no backing, i had no support. i was able to get three friends together like one could do sound, one could load my film camera, another could help out or something and you know, i somehow got us there and we got there you know and we still didn't have all the paperwork we needed, so i talked my way in like with what we had and we got access and then we were inside there for you know this pretty good time.  : like that was a project, that was like a cornerstone because, you know, like you just kind of have this belief that you're going to make it work and you just keep going kind of and um you know eventually you're kind of in this place making this work that you really believe must be made.  
 : well, it was actually what i didn’t know that made me curious. seeing a space on a map in the late 20th century and seeing that there is absolutely nothing there is kind of astounding.  : and i think that, i'll send you a copy of the piece, psychologically, it was the first piece i made that i would say is kind of a psychological landscape and i started making works that i saw in that vein,\ 
 : she is! you are... you are. (emergency truck siren)
interviewer: -laughs-

: -laughs-
 : i think you just do it. like, i think you just have something and you just move on it. like the only thing that, you know, stifles creativity is…waiting, you know. and you never need to wait. like you can always find something, you know.  : i  mean, i’ve never taught, i've, uh you know, done some... go ahead. : i wonder how much they made you pay for those little tripod legs.
interviewer: it came with the camera -laughs-. : -laughs-

interviewer: i think it might have filled up the card -inaudible, 22:56- we’ll see what happens. it may last a few more seconds (fiddling with camera). anyhow, um yeah so do you think that... i don't know... what would you advise people? things like\

: i mean. i think in some ways\
 : \i mean well it's, you know, we live in a society where there's an emphasis in tools. people specializing in increasingly rarified tools. i mean this is the era of specialization in a certain way. um... that being said, you know can take any specialty, any kind of trade, you know whether its learning a program or whether it’s you know a carpenter, you can exploit that into a creative language. like so, it's all open. um, but the idea of teaching creativity is kind of a different question and you know, that's something that came up a little bit in [city 3]. you know, there’s education. of course two education people there too. there's like twos of everything. it's like the noah's arc or something. so, -laughs- but, you know, that idea of to teach creativity or to teach art i think is a really weird question, you know, because i don't know you can - i think you can expose people to things like read this look at this. like like take a road trip and go here and those things will become the tools more than someone saying this is how it works because i think it's something, you know everyone has their own language. and you know, to see individuals take what's unique to them and to um exploit that into a creative voice, you know, is a beautiful thing and um... so, in that sense, that is probably one of the few things that mark us as humans, you know, as unique\

interviewer: yeah.

: \you know.   
 : a few people?
 : oh, i mean, you know, i think, you know, i find myself influenced by certain kinds of music. definitely like, you know, for some reason i kind of go back to some of the mentalist a lot like especially [musician]. i think [musician] is someone like, you know, i just saw so much in his music, like so many, you know, kind of ideas that were related to what i was doing and it was interesting because  some of the stuff was made thirty or forty years ago and it’s seen as like this niche music - but i saw how it could apply to the visual art that i was making. so, [musician] is a great example and you know i think with some people like this, you find the connections are great. like i just, you know, so i said so i gotta meet [musician] right, so i found a way to interview him like years ago up in [city], so i flew up and we did this interview and i start thinking, ok [musician], we gotta use him for a project, we gotta work with him, we gotta collaborate, so, you know i tried him over and over and eventually like we in the last couple of years we've done these three projects together. like these, one of them was this huge thing in [country 7] and he created this original composition for, but i guess what i'm getting at is not so much to talk about this musician, but to talk about the process that... you know, i find it very interesting when you find people you connect with to have a rapport and to have that dialogue and you know sometimes you're just so curious about how they, they evolved to do what they're doing. you know that you want to know them\

interviewer: yeah. : \you want to work with them\  : yeah, well, likewise. -laughs- it's sunday and we're here with a robot camera. -everyone laughs- it’s going to walk around (referring to the camera with the tripod legs).
interviewer: but, um. yeah i mean i think artists like [artist 1]... [artist 1] i've always thought that's fascinating, fascinating, fascinating. probably, you know, the greatest living artist. but, with [artist 1] i just love the way i have, you know he'll - excuse me (turns to his computer) i'm just try to keep the music going – um... here we go, something else. um, but [artist 1] was like one of the artists that i found who just ignored medium, like one of the kind of early artists who was just said like, like if i want to make a piece of neon over here, i'll do it. if i want to make uh, like you know, like rub this glass five hundred times and video tape it, i'll do it. if i want to make like the most, you know, strange and offensive piece using a clown and a bathrobe over here, i'll do it. but the work is like super intelligent and incredibly precise and sophisticated, but like he just didn't care. he just used, you know, he would use whatever is around him that worked the most perfectly and accurately with the concept he was working with.  : it's like true conceptual art. i think that when you look at what conceptual art is, you see that it is um much more where we're going in terms of the future of culture than a lot of the processes of the past, you know, which might be, you know, you have this set of skills and you refine the skills over and over and you do this one thing in a niche and what conceptual art brought us what that everything around you was a possibility. it can be daunting, but everything around you, you know, has a possibility to become an idea that is uniquely yours. and or, a way for you to understand things by using that, whether it's that leaf outside... like i might look outside and i see you know this hedge and [artist 1] would look out there and say i'm going to recreate that hedge out of paper and rephotograph it the size of this window, but what i did when i built this house was, this was framed over here, so i stood there with a camera and i photographed this hedge and turned it into a silkscreen and we silkscreened these walls. when you stand here at certain times of day and the lights the same, the chromo matches and the outside disappears with the inside. so, it can be something as banal as that.
 : i better not lose the hedge or else these walls will really look stupid -laughs-.
 : but, i think that's also, just for your studies, i think that idea that there's a major rupture, you know, in our lives, like, you know even the last decade or so, even in terms of like how an individual can use language or use language of creativity and the fact that now everything is fragmented, like we're used to an instagram or a short text or the distribution of things is so liquid that it's creating a totally new condition, you know.  and, going back to the [city 2] thing again, that's also why i found that so retarded was that it was just so, and i don't mean retarded in a slang sense, i mean retarded in a creative way, like it was just this old model\  : i think it's kind of allowing us to do things and create things we not only would not have been able to do in the past because the tools weren't there, but also the audience wasn't there, because the audience around us as friends is a lot more sophisticated at reading that information. i don't know, i think that's... a lot of what i do kind of feeds into that. it either slows things down, or really speeds them up, or breaks them apart, you know, into pieces instead of giving the straight story.  
 : ah, that's a weird question. 
 : it's hard to answer because it's hard to see like one show or one piece and know... but sometimes you can get a sense when someone's kind of onto something, you know, or you can kind of see, wow that person is - they see things differently or what they're doing strikes you as being new, so maybe that can go further and become even more of what it is.
 : well, i mean there's certain things we all see tons of. like, we've all seen a million films or a million film things, so all of our perception for that is pretty sharp and we can tell if someone's got something there that is at all unique, you know. so maybe it's more of that, kind of fuzzy thing, you know, you know, is there potential here? does it somehow seem… like new? i think that same thing applies to yourself, you know, you don't really... like i would never really want to say something is finished and put it out there if it felt like it wasn't completely foreign to me. like, if it feels foreign, then that's good. if it doesn't and i feel like, oh that's kind of like a [artist 2] painting or, you know, or [filmographer] film or something like, i would, i would just you know, consider it like something that we're still working on and it's gotta go pretty far. 
 : well, i mean, i think when you look at it and you don’t know where it came from is like an interesting feeling. like, sometimes, you can, you know, hat piece in [city 3], like that was something where we were filming that for a couple of years, like, you know, all over. and working on you know, how to create this living building with these images that were always different that would feed off of the landscape around it and the landscape and the people would influence the building. so all of those things were like things that are, you know, they're conceptual. you're working through um those ideas and you're sitting there saying, well okay, wouldn't it be great if we wrote a code that could do this and this and this and i don't know how to write code, so i talked to someone that does, and you know, we filmed these things. we organized them this way. so, it's this huge kind of like system, but there's nothing to see. you know, you can't see it at all until that day in march when it turns on all of a sudden and then\

interviewer: right.

: \there's a few thousand people and they're standing there like what's this going to look like when it turns on? like those kind of moments you look at something and you say like okay that's really strange, like that's a little out of body. 

interviewer: uh huh.

: like you see it and you say okay so it’s living on its own now. but, i think it's not so much... i don't think you get a pleasure from that necessarily, i think it’s more that you look at that and you have this feeling that there's something that wasn't there before, and that's like a very interesting feeling as opposed to a sense. i find it very selfless as opposed to egotistical. i find it like you look at something that you've made and all of a sudden it's no longer a part of you anymore, it's out there and become pollen or it's just part of other people's encounters. so, it's more about letting go than like you know, yeah. 
 : there’s a difference? -laughs- : you mean in terms that things are made?  : oh, i don’t know.  interviewe: in creation. 

: yeah...there must be.  : i sometimes...i think [artist 3] is a great person to talk to about that because [artist 3] defies stereotypes, you know. you look at her and she's, you know, the whole thing. and i think that, once again, that goes back to those historic viewpoints that a woman should be like this and a man should be like this and is creativity feminine in some kind of way, you know. is it really, or is that what we're drawing from it you know, due to gender stereotypes? so...
 : this is so cool, i get a psychologist for free! -laughs- it's amazing! : well, they were in a way, but they were more into literature. you know, they both wrote to some degree, my mother more than my father. um, you know, but i think they were, you know, they were into that side of it but i think, almost more than that, they really followed, like really appreciated certain cultural things, you know, like my father almost to an obsessive degree like, you know like glen gould playing bach, like that equation for him was like, you know, i think his whole life he studied that, just the differences between the different variations and different years that gould would interpret bach and how and why james joyce, he was like obsessed you know obsessed with joyce, you know... when he died like next to his bed there was a bookshelf of ulysses and there were like ten or twelve or fifteen copies of ulysses and um, each one of them was like, i realized it wasn't that he was collecting ulysses because he likes to collect books or anything, and he could care less about the condition of a book, he just wanted to consume it, but um each one was like just written in and like footnoted like to a point where the bindings almost broke and that would be like one for five years and another one because that book broke, another one. like just kind of all through his life, like, you know, unpacking these things like that, you know. yeah. he would have been interested in that improvisation brain guy in [city 2].
 : [scientist]. : well, you know i think when i was a lot younger, um you know, you kind of have these scattered ideas and you kind of maybe make one or two of them and have maybe five or ten ideas. and i think the - all that for me kind of, just in a gradual way, kind of accelerated more and more and more you know and i think that art studio, if you guys ever come down, you know, like the studio itself is really like these different buildings and each room is a different person working on something, a different medium, you know, so at this point you kind of walk through and like you know in the front house right now we're editing a future film from [participant's film project] like and in the room behind that we're working on a series of sculptures. over there, we're doing sound for this other project, etc. etc. so, just kind of like multiplies and it's really... at this point it's really vast. like, there might be, i don't even know,  there might be like fifteen projects were doing now. some of them are museum shows we're doing two years from now. some of them are, you know, happenings, books, feature films, like and then on top of that there will be a division over here like this page will be sculptures and right now we're working on, i don't know, something like ten to fifteen sculptures for this show in september and all of those are different. like, one of those this, you know, column from the floor to the ceiling that's like perfect white column and then it’s like carved out in the middle and it's like stalactites and stalagmites and these drip water and the water drips creating rhythms, so you can compose the water drips to create this sonic composition, you know so. then, over here you have like a cast public payphone from [city 2] and the payphone is like every single part of it is cast out of translucent glass and it’s lit from inside and as a viewer approaches it, the light moves in different rhythms according to how you're standing or how you come up to it. so, there's just all of these things like that kind of going on right now. so now it's like it's different than when you're twenty and, you know, you're just trying to like fabricate these three things yourself and pay for them and do an odd job. so now it just feels now feels really natural to me, like the way we're making stuff. the rate that we're making stuff feels like very good about it. um there are times when it can be a lot and that's only kind of when we're doing huge, huge projects. um. usually the filming projects. but, um right now, it feels good. 
interviewer: huh, that's amazing. and uh, where do you think these ideas are coming from? like you got all these different things going on.

: yeah.

interviewer: is this just one thing leading to another?
: yeah. continuously. 
interviewer: yeah.

: yeah. continuously.  also, there will kind of be trajectories of things. i can kind of... here... can use this as a case study a little bit. (gets book out). you know this project that we did at the [museum] in [city 6] as part of the smithsonian. this was a, you know, this was a - we did a piece before this. this piece, [art project], and [art project] was a story of this young woman. she was kind of living with this condition that she was only in the present, constantly pushing into the future. she has no conscience, no remorse. she's just nomadic. she's just kind of, you know, in the business of moving and um and this - we shot around the world in different hotels and motels, you know, on the road. to make the piece, i worked with this old friend, actress, [actress 1], and, with [actress 1], i had known her for a long time and she goes what's the script and i said the script is you're going to spend a month with me and we're going to become this character, like we're not going to write it out, we're going to wear you down and we're going to travel so much and we're going to be in so many dislocating places that the piece will make itself, you know. you're just kind of the core of it, you know. so, you know in this project, we did this, we kind of created this journey that was so um aggressive. i don't mean it as some kind of jet set way, i mean actually in a very raw way.  : the experience count was so much. the kind of amount of hours that you are in motion was so much, that kind of made the piece and made the character and she became the character within it and at a certain point, like here at [city 3] at a firing range, you know, this is in the yucatan or something, this is like this sequence over and over of different planes that she is in, you know texts from it\

interviewer: uh huh.

 : \some hotel room we built out, reality strips down in it and it just becomes a phone, bed in motion. and then eventually, like in this piece, we -  one of the - it was a film, but it was also, i thought what i should do is make this a film installation but also we should make this a live piece. uh the - in [city, country] they asked me to create an opera, i was working on this at the same time - i said, we'll turn this into an opera and we'll stage it in [country], but because this character is nomadic in this piece, we won't use an opera hall, she'll be in motion. so, what we did was we got this barge in the mediterranean and - it's much easier to show some stuff than to talk about it....(looking through book) i don't know where anything is in here... so, yeah, so we uh\ 
 : \got this barge and the audience would get on the barge at dusk and go through the night and this would be the five chapters of this woman's life. the hotel room in the center, the screens around it projecting the different scenes we shot around the world.

interviewer: wow.
: so then it became this kind of fiction film and the film was extracted back into reality, like actually in motion... you see this is the center of the barge and every chapter's room would be deconstructed more and more and more until eventually, you just see the four poles that hold up the hotel room that become this choreographed pole dance while she is reading down countries as fast as humanly possible. here, a projected image with a real image behind her. this is something else... (book pages turning) but anyways, in this piece, for example, there was this one scene i wanted to have this one hotel room and as she's making calls in the hotel room or something i wanted to have these do-whoppers singing this song "i only have eyes for you". so, i found these two guys from, you know, , these two like soul guys to relearn do-whoop and like sing it acapella for me for this scene. so, then like a couple years later after doing this, i was thinking about this project in [city 6] at the [museum 2]... and this museums just like concrete, there's like one window or something, and they said do you want to do a show at the museum here, like inside the museum they intended. and i got out of the taxi and i looked and said thanks for inviting me but i don't want your museum, i want the outside of the museum, so let's just use this whole thing. so, we're thinking about that and we're thinking about, you know, how do we... what do we do with this building that is, you know the brutalist architecture in the middle of [city 6] ? so, i kind of like had written and written all of these ideas because...i'm just explaining this long form because it talks a lot about the process and a lot of the things that we are discussing... so, you know i thought, well now i have a canvas. the canvas is concrete, it is four stories high, it is in [city 6]. i have a year to create something for this. because with our art... my kind of art there's these hardcore deadlines like this show has got to happen, so i wrote all of these ideas and i just have like acres of ideas on post-its in the studio and the clock really started ticking and i thought, shit, i need to reduce this and make the essence, like the kind of thing you write on your hand, and you make it off that and it thought, okay so i went in there, locked myself in there for like a couple weeks over the holidays or something and just stayed like in the studio over and over writing and thinking of stuff. finally, i feel myself just like crossing out all of these ideas. just kind of like slashing them, slashing them, slashing them i had written a like 80-100 page script for this one idea and i just threw it away. and i reduced it down to this idea... i thought what's the most simple? if i have all of this clutter, what is the most simple thing in the world? and the most simple innovation of the 20th century is the pop song. everyone understands a pop song. even someone in the philippines driving a taxi knows that song as much as you do. so, i thought if i'm going to reduce everything, i should reduce it down to the simplest thing, which is a song. so, what i'll do is take this entire work, this enormous work based on just one three and a half minute song. and i thought of that song two years before in [country 8], "i only have eyes for you". so, that's what we did. we made this work entirely based on that, so you have... i brought back the same characters and they lead into about a couple hundred other characters, we remade the song about 40 or 50 times. everyone from... like [musician 2] made like 10 versions, [band] or like some, you know, slide guitarist guy from down the street. a woman i found in a parking lot bus stop sang it and we just made this work and it goes from person to person. so in this piece, it creates this (showing something says you can use this as a case study) art in [city 6] at [museum 1]. we did a piece before this mapping device, psychological mapping device from a modern nighttime city that just goes from person to person. every person is singing a passage of the song differently, then it transforms. so here, you have these factory workers and he just starts mouthing these words like "i walked down a, you know, empty avenue" she starts speaking to herself "but i only have eyes for you". it just keeps going and going and going. so, here you have the factory multiplied by the factory workers surrounding the building and there's sound and there's sound going down the [mall name] and towards the white house and over by watergate, which i love. it' seven better because robert redford showed up for the opening and he's like "[participant], i want to spend some time with you and talk about this." and i said, "did you know that watergate is right over here?" because remember all the president's men... and he's like yeah. i said i was thinking of you because i put a speaker down there, like right in front of watergate so this piece can pour into watergate. half of it's like abandoned now, half of it is still like a hotel or office, it's totally weird. but anyways, then that image folded into a different piece. this lightbox space. this was something else again where we … it was a journey across the country from the east to the west only filmed in hotels and motels and in each one i reintroduce a vicious animal. so, you have like a 12 western jackrabbits in barstow and this cougar... i don't know where he was... in like arizona or something... : that's a lyric to what? : that's right... hahaha. we did the happening in [city 7] for a [art project]. we took over a drive-in, an outdoor drive-in over there. yeah. : yeah, it's like the alter ego to like palm springs, like who wants to go to a modernist house and have some gourmet food and you go to this place and it's just like 300 motels that are all completely vacant, a bowling alley, people all tweaked out of their brains. it's just raw. it's just like raw desert town left over.  : yeah, let's just knock ‘em out. : so, maybe it's already there already and you don't need the questions. : i actually like... kind of the more projects i have going on, the more healthy i feel. to probably like a limit. there's a certain point to where it just gets like exhausting because of the amount of hours in the day, but i feel really comfortable when we have many things happening at once. um, and tracking them or following them feels quite easy, i'm aware of the details of everything at once. and, it kind of... because there's... like people that work for me in different ways, it makes it not that difficult to... like i've described our studio, it's almost like this right and left hemisphere. there's production and then there's organization and there's different rooms that are kind of different mediums. but, it makes it very easy to kind of just walk in and kind of know exactly what [studio assistant] is doing today, why he is looking for these images, and how to help him refine that and then weed it out, but then to step over here, and we're editing a film, and to have input on losing like a bunch of scenes or something, you know. it just feels really natural to me.  : what do you mean exactly about the latter? : flying squirrel.  : i might have a corrupt answer to that because, like last time we were talking about the most unusual animals... so they're fresh in my mind right now... ostrich, you know. : i don't really think about it that much. um, i, honestly, i don't really sit there and think.... like i know, for example, tonight i want to sit down and i want to write and i want to write about this, you know, this one thing i want to do next month. in association with the show, it's happening with the sign twirlers you see like advertising viagra, 1-800 numbers, i found the best of them from a championship and i want to get like tend of them to do this kind of word piece... we'll go down to [city 2 street], the kind of dodgy district where my gallery is, but it's like that... i know the idea, but i need to sit down and break it down. like, what words will they use, what will they wear, what is the body language, what is the condition they should be seen in. so, that for me is kind of work, but i don't, you know, and maybe like working on that piece, song 1, where i said i found myself shut in for a while, knowing i had this amount of time to work it out, like this also works very well. that idea of deadlines, or a kind of self-imposed pressure. and i think i've tried to shift that from, you know in the past where sometimes it can be exterior pressure where it can be a museum saying, "we need to have this now". now, i'm trying to treat things very differently and make things... try to shift that so it's not external, but it's internal. and saying things like how can i make my own system to make the best work i can? and with my own... pressure if you call it, and it may in a sense be greater than exterior, but it's mine at least. you know, instead of saying i have to answer to someone else. i think that is when you get fatigues when you are answering to other situations, you know.  : i can't get no satisfaction... : you can probably sing it... acapella version right now.  1002 : oh, i know very well. i convinced one of my students to quit that school and apply to [college 1] law school. and he got in 1%. i consider that the biggest victory of my life. the only thing was –inaudible- i think i saved him from a life of unhappiness and i gave him and a secretary in the office a nice coffee and croissant every morning, what he wants. : no, but i am serious. i know it looks dumb but i am serious. i think that is the only thing i did in my life that i would assume is pretty solid. like i think it's initiated enough to guarantee the guy a pretty good life. i don't think that once you come out from [college 1] that they pay for you to go to school that you would not get the job and you would not be happy, so... i think that's the best thing i did.  : uh, trying to avoid the people to a shitty life. hahaha.  : no, i have the mama syndrome, yes. i think that my role in the world is to take care of people, yes. : no, no no. i really think everything fit together because i may look  -inaudible-, but i really think that the artist's job is to lead the people toward the better, no? and so, you do it in every way. some people, they do it with very beautiful painting, maybe i do it in a more low class way, practical... perfective way. : i don't know... i've been drowning for ten years of free school. like we started in a backroom in a bar in [part of city 1]  last three months the year because that's how much they can come in without  i think my role in the world is to take care of people.  : i really think an artist's job is to lead the people to be better. some people do with beautiful  paintings or other ways. i started in a backroom in [part of city 1] , last three months of the year because that's how much they can come in without... we can't give a visa to people because it is -inaudible-. and so it's three months out of the year. people come from all over the world. fifteen students a year, they do this three months program and then they leave. i've been running a club, took three and a half years to build, but we kept it open for a year. the architect is the same one who designed the [building 1] in bilbao. the art is very important. everything was for free so anyone could come. but it wasn't like garage shitty style, it costed me like half a million dollars to build, so yes, costed me everything i made in my life. actually, that building –inaudible- to what i made in my life because i'll... let's say i'll find it. so, i don't know. i think that's why we are here for, no? maybe i am wrong.  : um, this is going to be very complicated. maybe because i never studied art, and i never understood and now it is too late, so i already did it a different way. art usually goes through the step of representation, you know like you said the interior work does this... i unfortunately never understood that step of representation and i understood that you could deal directly in a scale with reality. so, um, an example, i bankrupted the first time in my life because i wanted to do this thing. i wanted to jump off the peak of the everest because i thought it was very exciting to generate something with a permanent modification of geography, of the universe, no? and also because there is also that fight of what is still of the everest of the –inaudible- and every six years somebody changes it. and the future of it and art. and i thought that was very elegant. and i really spended the fortune and i didn't even go up there. the first one hundred thousand dollars is just to companies to find out who can give you helicopters to go up there to bring the dynamite, who can go up there, you know all this technical useless shit, you know. one hundred thousand dollars later we find out that the government of [country 1] will never give you the permit. so, i gave up. one day, somebody called me and said i went to go see this exhibition and there was this artist who climbed up on top of the everest. i was like fuck, shit, i was a little bit jealous because i didn't make it up there. it was like an expedition, and so i ran immediately to look at this shit and i go there and it's this picture, photograph of these two guys, i think it’s the artist and his sister or friend, and they are climbing up this snowy mountain with this, you know, north face jacket and everything. you can't fucking climb up the everest like with the north face jacket that you buy. that's good for new york winter. so, no that's fiction and maybe it's fiction enough for a plane in a gallery, no but you will never be the only men that went up there three times. it's faking a picture. there is a thing of filmmaking. there are people, for example, who can stimulate reality so well that you would be enough to make you live an emotion because what they built is so perfectly realistic to you that you will shed emotion. but i think a film narrative, like commercial filmmaking is the only option. i don't think art is they have this chance of lying ang lying so well that you will really feel reality. you know, it's like it was different before because with the old time art, like i always saw art as celebration of why you carve into the rock that you kill the dinosaur because you want to show your chick that you are cool, and that's how art started, you know. like people, they want to show what they did, you know, so it starts from this feeling of memory and i think that the old mastering of painting, you know, i can do it better and better always became this desperate research of creating something that you would be so real that you would relive the emotion. then, you know, everybody says that artists are avant-garde. i have a theory that art is always behind, you know the industrial revolution happening art in i would say the 1930's, like hundred years after the real war, no? and still it's not because in the moment that you have the industrial reproduction of images, images before it was photography, but then it become, now film, and the other day i went to see a 4d film. reality is not 4d because they think that shaking your chair and shooting a little bit of compressed air is a dimension, but, you know, it's all new, let's give it to them. but, the thing is like... i always saw art as a media that we can use to deal with the reality, but not to represent anymore, so the answer to this is a long answer to your question is that i see my work exactly that, you know, it's like i don't think that the object realistically will change or experience, you know like example, i have a light on the standard down there, it's up on the roof and it goes on when i'm in [city 1] and goes off when i go out of town. i don't know if really seeing the light will generate in you a bigger experience than me telling you it's there. then maybe you cannot believe it, so you want to go see it physically, but that is a separate discussion. but, i think that the action is the important thing. and then, it's the same thing of... in science an example could be when you measure a field. i don't know in the medical term, but i'm a chemical engineer, for example, if you want to check a magnetic field, you take a little magnet, you throw it inside, the only problem is you think you throw inside a way out of the field. so, that's why i have an issue with going through an object because in the moment i make a painting. hanging the painting on the wall is going to permeate your field. so, it's not you and your painting because i can't cancel the universe. so, in my work i vary to wo to make the painting because i like people to live the real experience. so, i used the painting this immediate to generate something, but you have to be conscious that in the moment that anything you do, deforms what is this experience, so i don't know if this is the answer... : that's the reason why you will die broke because you don't go to the top, that is what makes fortune.  : uh, real it's always a tough concept to deal with. i think in order to accept real... because then real is not really real. like we assume that real because we don't want to kill each other. kill our self... all of us, but in reality, no because color or no color because it's just the way we perceive the light. your chair is not really brown. solid is not really solid because eighty per cent of this is space. so, yes we want to call it real because we don't want to realize how much we don't exist, but i think human being need to come to some compromises. i mean, greek people, they got it from the beginning, not the pandora box, there are some shit that, you know i started my thesis in my time was the time of the big boom of quantum mechanics. one day, i woke up and decided that, you know, i don't want to deal with this shit because i really think this is too small for human beings to want to deal with it because we are going to understand everything and the day we understand everything will be the day we realize we don't exist, so maybe you don't want to fuck with this. and then, i went to my thesis advisor and i told him, i forgot what he said, but he wanted to move to another guy because i decided that i didn't want to contribute to the mystery of the revelation and i started to do this new thesis about the search of symmetry and patterning, object dominated system. : chemical engineering. so, in reality, my times, they were the big times of the fluid flowing into industrial planes, so you do mathematical modeling to stimulate the flow... fluid dynamics. but, things didn't work one day as an engineer in my life. actually, my thesis advisor, she went to two weeks before she went to conference, i think in princeton, she met another nerd like her and they fall in love and she follow him in greece where he was from and, you know, in italy, you can't find nobody, so if you don't show up at [college 2] anymore, they can't find you. : but if you show up, maybe you get chances because maybe it's like... if you don't show up in italy, you can't be find and you can't be replaced. so, we were all waiting for her to come back. and, we are not talking about a twenty year old. this is a forty year old woman who just... : yup, never came back... and then, i never discussed my thesis. in the meantime, you know waiting for her, i went to [city 2] on vacation for two weeks and stayed three years and, yeah, i never discuss my thesis in the future. and now this, you know it's like fifteen years after that i will not even know where to start anymore. also, because the brain gets very old. : oh, no, no, no. i really notice the decay. i was gambling and i realized that the good time, i could play for like easily two days without never leaving the table and it's very hard in [country 2] because in [continent 1], they don't talk at the casino. in [city 3], while you keeping your counts you have the fucking white flesh people, "i'm doing so well!" and the dealer talking to you to make sure if you have a little bit of attention left it gets lost. i could do this for two days. now, like i will never be able to keep the concentration so long. like, the brain i think decays very very fast.  : because today i will really need to go back to [city 3], so if there is nothing left, let's try to find it because i need at least a week of playing to recover from... :  um, i always think everything fit together. it's like i come from one of these places that they always tell you look at everybody because you look at the planet because you learn something. and in a way you're not writing... i did engineering because it was the longest one to avoid going into the military because in my time, we were obliged... and engineering was the only one that would let you postpone until twenty seven. and the other one you can postpone until twenty three for the short one, twenty five for the long one. in reality, everybody assumed we would do engineering because my father was an engineer and was very well known and so everybody, you know in [country 3]you should always do what your family does. maybe that really works well. why everything is together... i don't know or maybe we all know. it's life.  : what am i the most proud of? : that’s a challenging question because i think of things contextually often and so i'd say i don’t know if there's one absolute thing that i'm most proud of.  from an accomplishment perspective, i'd say i have two great kids, but i think that, you know if you were to be more specific i think i would have a better answer.  : works that i've completed and put out into the world... : am i overthinking this?  let me know if i'm overthinking this...  : yeah, yeah, again, if were focusing on works, you know, i'd say there are a couple of different things that i'm proud of maybe one is... well i think of all of my works as sort of moments not necessarily sculptures.  they've sort of realized themselves in different opportunities of exhibiting and bringing ideas to the public, so in the case of public engagement, lets say, there are a few moments when i think very complicated or difficult stories and ideas have manifested into good projects, you know, like i did a project for the 2004 [museum installment 1] which was actually exhibited for that and ended up just being shown there which was a sand sculpture project which manifested over many years but also i'd say in the scope of work accomplishments i've also been equally as proud of attempts that my team has made that have failed you know because i think that merely because something was realized or celebrated in a public facing circumstance, you know, there are things that are more hidden victories that we are also proud of.   : well the value of that – there are probably like four project of that caliber that i think that have happened over the past 10 years that i think have hit on all cylinders, lets say, in terms of the nature of the relevance of the idea, the difficulties of accomplishment, the clarity of voice, the teamwork and all the apparatus that was created in order to help realize it.  so a lot of different metrics or means in thinking about how things are successful.  i think about that a lot i think about success a lot which is why the first question about pride, i take the question i interpret the question as a sense of equating the word "pride" with success in that you guys are curious about how i feel you know that i'm nourished in an emotional sense from successful work.  that’s sort of how i think of pride.  and for me, again, the reason why its such a complex question to kick off the gate is there are several different ways that i look at every work, every body of work, and every project, but there are few that have succeeded i think in the number of different ways of which we are particularly prideful of, so in that particular case you know there are a number of different things that sort of went into that, right?  so there's a personal narrative of being an artist and being in that show that contributed to a sense of pride.  there were incredibly nuanced story of even getting into that exhibition and what that means as a young artist to you know grow up in the united states and hear about the [museum installment 1] and how it’s a referendum on you know moments.  then there was four years or six years before that show me being offered to be in the [museum installment 1] for a technology project which i didn’t want to do because you know i knew technology well but i didn’t want to have my artwork defined in that class of work and so i opted out and so to get back in under the most ridiculous circumstances which was a ephemeral sculpture that couldn’t be acquired was something that i thought was really meaningful at this point of like market fracture where all of a sudden the market exploded after the early 2000s in that way.  you know these are all the social professional narratives that contribute to a sense of pride to that work in that show, right.  i think from a technological accomplishment, me as a sculptor, you know creating this path of this moment where i thought of and still think about my work being a conceptually based practice that articulates itself in a sculpture and then realizing itself in a sculpture that had to be made in the museum in the moment and was destroyed right after without an artifact for people to consume was all about the nuance and complications of what it means to be a sculptor making objects in an era of object consumption was something that’s also very you know incredible story for me related to that work.  then, as a sub-category inside of that narrative there's the actual narrative of learning how to make and realize the essence of sand sculpture which in itself is a two year journey of prefacing with the guinness book of world records holder, the best sand sculptor in the world, and having to assemble a team that used to meet with him at four in the morning every day for ten hours for months straight to try to learn how to actually accomplish that and realize that form and so there was a level of technical prowess and a learning curve there that you know sort of happened and then there was the conceptual aspect when we created that work.  created it here in [city 1].  made it first at this gallery in [city 2] and when we installed it for the fort time in [city 3] i remember getting off, i know exactly the, i don’t have the date on recall, i know we finished the installation after three days of being covered in sand and we took a train, it was in this gallery in [city 2] called [gallery 1] that housed and launched a bunch of big c's but we got off the train into midtown to get dinner with my crew after and we were covered in sand and it was a cold winter day and the doors opened into a sort of the foreroom or whatever and somehow a gust of wind blew both doors open and we walked into this barbeque joint and all the sand literally flew off of our bodies, off of our clothes into the floor and we look up on this tv screen in the bar and george bush was there announcing how the sandstorm had abided and we were going to war.  were covered in sand and we literally just cried.  so there were these moment about creating an anti-war monument that was ephemeral in the midst of the situation walking out and the timing... so the timing of that piece, you know, the technology of the piece, even though it was the technology of sculpting sand, but you know the narrative of that personally, again, all those factors lets say there are probably five more big stories that that i'm not invoking because they aren't on recall, that all contribute lets say to you asking me the question of what i'm most proud of, you say, well that's a moment that i think stands out, you know, there are other stories, more recently the [individual 1] project, my project with [individual 1], the bridge, you know again there's you know hours of stories and different nuances around the different components of that work conceptually, formally, professionally, socially that all contribute a number of different factors and that one was firing on all cylinders, right?  so there's a few, there's been four or five in the past fifteen years that have done that.   : oh, i have tons of like great failures that... in a lot of different works.  the biggest one, i created an organization called uber before the car uber.  i actually came up with the name, uber.com.  one of my former investors actually made ten million dollars selling the name to uber as opposed to 100 million they could have made they just stood tight and trusted me.  no, we created... i sort of rallied the group of artists, and designers, and technologists together to make a platform for creativity and it was the first... there were smaller sites now, we were getting bigger than, there are sites now called square space and places where you can make websites... we were the first to build that type of technology to allow creatives to express themselves creatively on the internet.  we ended up getting 600,000 artists to make their entire cultural personas online.  people were running businesses on the platform.  we fell victim to the 2008 global economy.  we were meeting all of our metrics but our investors went under, really our investors went under, not us.  but that caused us to go under, so the company was a failure, but i think as a gesture and as a learning experience, it stands out as a high... we're very proud of that failure.  again, in all these circumstances, it was an empowerment gesture.  it was something brave in technology.  it was highly innovative and even now there are things about the platform we built there that people are only understanding and bringing it to bear on new technology now.  from a storyline perspective, it was a culmination of a lot of different relationships that were built and realized in assembling a sort of creative infrastructure to realize the project because it was a huge project that capped in a bunch of different relationships i had nurtured over ten years, twelve years.  from a design aspect, we were innovative and again, there were a lot of things that we built that have had very positive repercussive consequences to everyone involved.  a team called the [group 1], who was a super great artist team in [country 1] they used to work for me there and they learned how to be an agency and they learned how to run an entirely autonomously self contained ecosystem of creativity from working with me there because we trained them how to do that.  so there's that type of circumstance that i think is a failure.  and then there's institutional things i'm proud of.  there was a gallery i helped to create called, [gallery 2], in downtown [city 1] and we were responsible for launching the careers of like [artist 1] whose, you know, a [prize] winner now, but we created an institutional space and circumstance for creativity and intellectual nurturing that ended up having very positive results for a number of different people, 50 or 60 different artists.  and again, in the same multiple criteria way of analyzing or thinking about even just all of the, even in the moment this is how i think of my projects, the relationship apparatus that was required that was required to launch the space, the organization to keep it going, the social and cultural marketing and gravitas to actually have a cultural agency, the different actual technique of installing artwork and building the gallery, the architecture, the design, the administrative ecosystem and fundraising, and all those things i was very prideful of.  then five years after [museum 1] had a show and we did it with a very explicit agenda, there were not that many people of color or marginalized artists in town to have any good space to show and this was a beautiful, perfect, 180 square foot space to exhibit and people were like what's a grassy space, why does it look great?  and we'd say just because its activist doesn't mean that it has to look poor.  our people need really good help to make some training for the big gals.  we went to, [museum 1] had a show called [show] about five years ago, when [artist 2] first show here and he tapped some of the untapped networks in [city 1], had a big show what he felt was the, or [museum 1] felt at that moment, controversially which was important to an artist, you know.  forty of the artists in that show would not have been there had not some legacy of [gallery 2] been there to give people their first show.  we walk around that show and say were really proud of this moment in 97 having these long term 15 year consequences of inclusion, you know where we walk through a big moka show and say these are the seeds of a creative effort that we put into the world 15 years ago that have now evolved.  there are artists now who are second generation [gallery 2] artists who had their first show, and[artist 1] has his first space he's launching the careers of other people and we launched him so its really great to be able to see how these ecosystems work, so yeah very prideful about that too.  but again, there's numerous types of projects and types of circumstances but they all invoke different types of thinking i guess.   : i do think a lot. : yeah, i've been accused of that.   : so this is what i think.  so, a while back, i came up with a theoretical framework for the way i think about my work.  and pretty much is the way, and this this, i'll try to explain this, we can talk about it back and forth, this sort of shapes my thought process about a lot of different things in terms of cultural agency, authorship, integrity, ethics, morality.  there's a lot that’s gunna be spun up into like the model that i'll sort of begin to explain to you.  i've be able to articulate it in a couple of different ways successfully so far and its always an ever-growing process of learning how to explain thinking about this, alright.  so, a while back the [university 1] did a think-tank about cultural production.  i was one of the guests and i was terrified because they asked me to be a respondent to this great theorist named [theorist] who's now a friend but, whose awesome, but what am i going to say, oh he was going to respond to me.  i was going to deliver a paper and he was gunna respond, like ya know.  and when i said, just write what you know, this is what i do know, just write what you know, or someone told me a long time ago.  and so i wrote about this, how i think about collaboration and relationships and what i said was i told a story about human invention and particularly in the form of computer science.  so in computer science prior to 1968, the most computer programming was with what they called process space programming which was linear programming and its how we all learned... you and i learned computer which is "10 print hello, 20 go to 10, run, hello, hello, hello, hello" because you know you can rationalize giving instructions to machines in a very linear way that way.  in 1960 they evolved to what they called object oriented programming and object oriented models of thinking which was no longer 10 print hello, it was more modular regions of thought that were worked on the interface to ideas and you would put things together sort of as building blocks, right.  as someone who grew up, in my early ages i started computer programming when i was you know 3rd grade, its pretty shocking circumstance, but then as i learned more and equated it, because also what i do a lot in my practice is i think about multiple timelines, clearly i have multiple criteria for thinking about things as basic as pride lets say i think about multiple timelines in history and say ok, what else happened in 1968 besides process based programming, object oriented programming, well civil rights, the fast-forwarding of post-modernity, well there were a bunch of things that happened in 1968 related to the way human interact with each other, the way that humans and empathy and this global sense of knowledge production were radical shifted and so i said, i use that as a locus of my own generative thinking and i was born in 72 so 68 happened already and i was the first generation beneficiary by all of that thought out in the world by the time i was already born, right so i presented at this conference, i said i am... my model of thinking is object oriented, and they said what does that  mean and i said well, if i'm going to do a project about... i said this is one of the questions that is theoretically opposed to that group they were like how do you find out like the matrix, like the movie the matrix and i said this is the thing, the computers are always going to win and they said why and i said because the computers don’t have to relearn algebra.  ok.  a baby has to relearn algebra and so you're talking about this motion where humans start from scratch.  humans start from not knowing anything and then they learn stuff and then you get to the point some time in your career where you can be generative but like you're never going to catch up and then these theoretical science fiction things where the computers always win because they never have to relearn anything because its already in a hard drive somewhere and they can plug in a hard drive, get faster processors, how do you theoretically beat that right?  and so i said in this conference, i said the way i think about it is thatil  only see a path towards the future towards trust empathy relationships in collaboration because the only way we can learn algebra together so we can have some type of syntax to communicate and mutually agree on some basic laws and then you can invent your thing, i can invent my thing, we can get together, and then together we are inventing something new.  we've created this space in between us where that is where the invention knowledge and that's where the computers can't touch and where the cyborgs can't touch and that's this unique space of infinite thought where we have infinite possibilities of thinking about the way things work so you know the curmudgeon, who's a curmudgeon since birth, only has the curmudgeon's effort to account for and now that curmudgeon could be a freaking genius which is why saying they might not be wrong 100% of the time but for me they are going to be wrong most of the time only because i know there's magic in between two people, there may be magic in the brain of one person by themselves, um its not coincidence to me that the most profound writers that i know of have major psychological issues, are manic, are schizophrenic and have this sort of internal dialect that’s entirely different from other people that i know who try to write from a very linear logistic methodology.  and so you know for me that’s what i think about relationships. i've been able to articulate recently by saying my practice uses a term called "kit bashing" which is an old model maker's term for putting pieces together that don’t necessarily make sense or people say "plug and play".  in that conference someone said, "well what do you think about like fundraising and dirty money." and i said, "all money is dirty and all money is clean", and they're like what are you talking about?  like you're talking about linear lineages of accountability, of causality, there's nothing that's universally linearly causal these days.  everything has multiple factors that contribute to decisions being made or to things happening and so where in as a creative person do you plant your flag and figure out where your path is.  and so for me i say it starts as an idea and expresses itself in whatever type of cultural language it needs to and that drives, i happen to have been fortunate to have been rigorous, and very studious, and humble about my own execution so i don't... i'm not like a privileged dilatant who goes and buys a technique, you know, when i go wanna work on something in magic because i want to do something in secrecy. i suspended my studio for 18 months, two years and i literally trained with the best magicians in the world for 18 months to go learn the nuance of it, not even to perform magic but just to learn it so i had a sophisticated dialogue with it instead of a -inaudible- one relative to the nuance of how i was going to form my practice and so i think the world of relationships to me, its in everything  do and its in every part... of all of my projects have a high degree of both rudimentary and sophisticated relationships with people to help realize everything and i think i do.  at the same time as with the math thing, and i also have a clear understanding of what i contribute, so i know a lot of artists, or i know some, who are really good at sketching something and giving it to a profound fabricator and then selling that sculpture to someone who doesn’t have their own personal base let's say of their contribution to their work at large and i think that's a very flat way of dealing with art and ideas, it happens, and were in a very hyper accelerated market economy so there's a market for that type of stuff, you know, not my thing, but... : yeah, the connections are everything. : absolutely, i grew up... i learned about the touring tests when i was in fourth grade, third grade and that has been... clearly there's like a... either were approaching really interesting fundamental limits about technological interface into humanity right now that are, you know that’s the challenge of the next 20 years is going to be.  like retina display, you don’t need anymore displays faster than a retina, higher resolution, because theoretically, optically you can't tell the difference.  ok, so where's that investment going?  there's a machinery, and apparatus of technological investment that are going to be hyper focused now on the brain part as opposed to the interface part. : yeah, well my friend made a movie that didn’t, wasn’t received well because it was a little complicated called [movie title 1], but like that’s my buddy [friend 1] who directed that and he's coming from the right place, he's raising questions, but the movie didn’t do that well, but johnny depp wanted in, but big questions though. : well, yeah, there's a lot of people, i'd say from both, yes, so i'll ask to, and i know i'm going to ask and not going to get a response, but, cuz i don’t know if its supposed to be open, but there are people who have been mentoring figures that have contributed to different pseudointellectual tool kit that i use and then there are people who i have mentored who have equally contributed to the maturation of my tool kit in a way because i find that i've been able to have a very generative formulation take place under both conditions.  so, i say i'm a good leader because i'm a really good student.  so, professionally i've had the benefit of having hard conversations and learning from guys like [individual 2], gil friesen, oprah winfrey, jim valentino in the comic book world, major talents in a lot of these different industries have at different times considered me an apparent or apprentice figure or wanted to be by their side and exposed me to a tremendous body of knowledge related to their practices as well as their modes of thinking.  there's a long list of really great people who have been really generous with me.  but also, not just really generous but have been generous and very successful so when i get to spend a year and a half with [individual 2] as his right hand person, you learn a lot.  i was one of the first people who helped start [comic book company], which is the comic book company that changed the world.  and i watched that whole process with some of the best comic book writers and illustrators in the world.  so there's a lot of people in that respect, following danny lewin in a company called akamai, danny died in 9/11, but he invented this technology called akamai.  but there's been really great people who have been peers or mentors on mentoring level who i've  learned a tremendous amount from.  and then, again, in terms of students and people i've helped tutor and help manifest in their own careers but process of doing that helped, you know [mentee 1] in the art world. others, [mentee 2] whose a magician, who was a young magician when i met him, pretty anonymous, but everyone was saying he was talented but wasn’t utilizing his talent and i helped  him basically create his career.  we started collaborating together and i can talk to you for ten week about the negotiations we went through in terms of creating that relationship, but together we crafted the not only a fracture in the art world and magic but also coproduced the most successful magic show in the past ten years and now he's writing the oscars and has sold shows to hbo and sold shows to showtime and films to disney and its all based on his coming into contact with me and learning how to actually be a creative and thinking about things.  but i've learned from him a lot of different things, i was able to work through his eyes as a fresh twenty something into the world and sort of create on a different momentum level as well, so there's people on all spectrums that have had relationships.  i have a team who has worked with me for almost 19 years now.  includes my brother as a technologist and some designers who have been with me and we've created a lot of different projects together and tool kits to make things.  they've also been very generative and valuable in building the process.  most of the people i work with jump on the board and don’t leave and so... : i have a team... there's probably been 20 people who have been with me for 19 years. : i think there's two primary things and then there's a whole bunch of smaller things.  but there's two primary things because the small things would be countered with all the negative things i do too, but the two big things keep them here despite all the negative things being counterbalanced by all the smaller good things.  one is i'm trustworthy.  two is, i'm saying this because this is the forum to say this and i don’t mean to be cocky, but i bring energy.  i know that sometimes good ideas plus opportunity is not enough.  its good ideas and opportunity plus energy and i don’t know how or why i have an infinite supply of energy and enthusiasm to things.  and it’s a hard rock philosophy that has to do with my upbringing that of why i function like this.  i don't have a pretty good sense of why i'm upright like this but i do know that the byproduct of all of this sort of history that i have is that i have a balanced supply of energy and people are attracted to that because people see within me as i see through other people's eyes people see through me that i have a very optimistic type of vision and ability to convince myself and people around me that great things can and will happen and can an will change for our betterment.  so they're into that, but that’s not enough because i also have considerable skills and experience to accomplish things and track record which contributes to trust because in circumstances personal, financial, business, or creative, i'm also trustworthy and brave and so i have the hard conversations whether it be a young fabricator who i want to work with because they're super talented and having an awkward but hard conversation about authorship and apprenticeship to come here, which is a meaningful one which allows people to do their best work for me and not feeling bad about doing their best form for me.  whether its me selling a company and taking care of someone who didn’t have a contract because it's the right thing to do and having that beacon to everyone else that ever does business with me again that i'm trustworthy because i've forgave a possible personal, or financial reward or there have been circumstances where i've sold companies and i took zero and i gave the entire money to all my staff and they know i'll jump in front of a bus for them because they trust and i've done it before.  they trust all of those decisions from the places i've made which is about being a builder and sort of wanting to create relationships that span my entire career as opposed to moments.  so i thinks its energy and trust are the two main things.  i think that right below those are my considerable skill and accomplishment and experience which is widely tenured, so i have a lot of ability to get things done, but i would say its trust and energy. : yeah. i, fast-forward from my childhood upbringing, i was born 6 and 1/2 weeks premature from a fourth generation [ethnicity] family in [city 1].  born there, grew up in a suburb called [subrub], i was red-green colorblind. : yeah, [suburb] auto mall.  i'm red-green colorblind more so in one eye, and i forget which eye, but i'm red-green colorblind, i grew up severely asthmatic, was in the hospital once a month if not more frequent for extended periods where i almost died.  asthma, pigeon-toed, scrawny, a really rough physical upbringing.  so that was always a very... my zero to five years let's say was marked with trauma.  then crazy shit happened like i was in an avalanche when i was in fourth grade with my parents and a freaking plane crash in [suburb] when we were younger on my elementary school.  so, the mid-adolescent years were marked with trauma.  i get into high school, i started trying to figure out the means of social engagement as an awkward, scrawny, young, weird kid and i started competing in body boarding and surfing and body boarding particularly because it was an innovation sport that was just being arbitrated on my watch.  there was no one doing really crazy things right in that era of that type of surfing like people were creating new tricks and surfing was in a lull, there was just big waves and if you didn’t have big waves, like we didn't have in [state 1], there was no opportunity for you to be progressive because only people in the world that were doing good things, these guys were in hawaii or whatever.  you could learn how to flip upside down on a body-board and next thing you know people are taking pictures, so i was like a sponsor kid that won contests and tried to do that and i have a funny perspective relative to a story about surfing we'll talk about later, but after that i got involved in gangs as a young adolescent trying to assert my own masculinity that’s saying in the dearth of role models for [ethnicity 1], then i ended up, because i'm good at things, being a really good gang member, so i got kicked out of five high schools, arbitrated major gang fights between the african americans and the [ethnicity 1] and got into all types of drama to the point where super big prowl and i never really expected to live too long because that was really this philosophical case that i made, i didn't understand why, i was just like this isn't going to happen.  what happened was when i got into college i started to make art, i started journaling, and i started journaling everything that happened in my entire life that i was ever embarrassed about and i wrote down form when i was like zero i wrote down everything that was embarrassing and what my emotional, intellectual reaction was and what the repercussion was of that reaction to get to the root of why i thought like what were my instincts and how this worked.  and i just did this unaided, this was no therapy.  this was just me in my art studio in my apartment in [university 2] just doing this.  and then i get to the point where i'm in high school, my journal gets to the point to where i'm in high school, and i wrote about a time when i tired to kill myself and i made a noose out of an extension cord, an orange extension cord and i tied it and put it around my neck and i flung it to my parent's chandelier on the second story of the suburban house in [suburb 1] and i jumped off the staircase and the whole thing broke.  this is literally what happened in the moment.  only when i'm writing about this later on in life, like as i'm an artist learning how to express myself, do i recall making the slip knot.  i had repressed this memory of this action because like i remember thinking, everyone's after you, your parents don't love you, you're gunna kill yourself, woah why did that break?  oh, my god you cant even kill yourself!  and then when i'm recounting this story, i realize like, there was a big part of you that was making a slip knot so it would break and make a loud noise so someone would come out and you would test and see if someone really cared about you.  once i achieved that moment of my personal, emotional singularity, once i realized that i couldn’t lie to myself, then i was like, oh my god, there's an unlimited amount of energy i have now because its on, now there's me, my own self-realized psyche, and this interface to the world, then what means am i going to go about expressing myself or my ideas because this all comes forma  dearth of opportunity expressing myself or thinking about how i can create a world that would be inclusive of me or how i could create a world that was more righteous or just or how i could create a world to combat any of these things that were these external forces that were exerting themselves on me that i could be proactive and do that.  and again, i wasn't that sophisticated when i was just getting started but that sort of was like the internal switch that triggered you know this sort of notion of how to contribute and how to be.  and so then i look back now and go, ok well that makes since as sort of this weird, awkward hero's journey.  i still don't have that strong of a relationship with my parents because all that time when i was a troublemaker, and honestly because my parents are third generation [ethnicity 1], even when i was younger all of the health issues i was having caused them to distance themselves from me dramatically, so i grew up in this intellectual and emotional vacuum as well, which is why i pride myself in having my kids and having an invested relationship with them on top of conversation, but so its this awkward hero's journey where defective kid grows up alone, ends up striking out, learns how to get realized through all this trauma being in an avalanche with my family for a week, seeing friends get obliterated by a plane crash, you know, goes to learn how to fight on his own in this weird system of gangs and create these awkward instant social contracts, you know that’s a good set of tools for a person to become an artist with in terms of emotionally, in terms of how structurally i think my value in relationship is so high. : i did it, i'm telling you the notion and instigating momentum of me doing it, i'm telling you it's like, because i was angry, i was an angry kid you know, i remember like this is not a singular anger, this is like a cumulative anger, let's start there and lets unravel, and my anger was like the most tangled ball of you know wire, and like the only way to untangle this is star at the end.  as much as you just want to snip it, the only way to actually do it is untangle it that way and then get there, so yeah, i don’t know how i came up with that... : this afternoon, i gotta be home for a family thing, but after that man, send me the wire frames! : ok, i struggle with that, that's awesome.  i'm happy and sad that so many people have figured it out.  i haven't figured any of that stuff out.  i'll tell you why.  it's because it is, i go back and fourth and for me, i see the value in both.  i'll have a third, which is the instant idea, which is also like i guess the instinctive, right?  so, for example, and i think that they're all related.  i don’t really know, and i say this because in the world of technology and in the world of now, part of my practice is absolutely informed by the notion of putting idea out into the world and repeating it, iterating it, changing it, and getting things out. i tend to think from a broad, emotional spectrum that the part of my practice and part of my brain that thinks that way is a little less romantic and sexy because its sort of like, i believe that this regenerates the confidence that you'll get to the conclusion, right, so there's like a confidence building part of that knowing that you'll get stuff done, a little more technical, a little less synaptic than in order to just put stuff out there, iterate, and grow. great technologists, mark zuckerberg, people who are around him, people who i've talked to who do great technologies have always said that their ideas are never done and i get that.  and my practice has absolutely instinctively throughout the course of my practice, achieved that.  there are things i've done twice, there are things i've done three times.  practice makes perfect.  like i get the  iterative part.  i really struggle a lot with the whole idea with the rumination part too because i beat myself up thinking that research with meditation on certain ideas and sometimes, that comes out with great results, you know sometimes.  i think more that that work and that, at this point in my career now which i feel like i'm just figuring out how to be the artist that i want to be recently, but i won't figure it out for another ten years, which is i think that that type of heavy meditation and rumination work is only good for me at least as the landscape and backdrop for the instant and for the flattening of that into my actual presence and the artistic gesture.  so, for example, out of the five projects lets say that i'm the most proud of, at least three of them i literally made them on the spot.  i am more prone to sit down with the two of you and talk about an art show that doesn't exist yet, making up right now the framework for what its going to be and having a better idea than if i sat down for three months and doing it.  now, if i had the work that i have already beat myself up on for the past two years on whatever i'm curious about now, i wouldn’t have the framing and the tools to actually come up with something, but i now have become more confident with my ability to create an idea instantly and have that be more successful than one that i sit and think about too long.  so now i understand more of the utility of why i sit around and think about life for a long time and why i think about to the world for a long time and why i make an investment into tools, intellectual tools, and framing and i do that so i can have an instant idea.  i do that so we can have these moments of inspiration and attraction and do that, ya so for me its all three like working in concert in different in almost polarities and trying to figure out in that flux where the snapshot works to make the artwork or the idea or to articulate that and you know each different idea has a different degree of leaning towards bias of one of those.  but ya, i remember i have another piece, which is another older piece that’s a [art piece 1] that spins... : it changes in the size of goblet, right, and you know i had done a lot of thinking at that moment about my transformation and the transformation portrayed by the venal and at that moment i was running [company] and i was seeing this moment where i was actually involved in a heavy creative person's ip activist project trying to change the illegal [company] into a legal [company], reframing it with a bunch of different creativity and thought, you know this, that, and another, but i happened to be, and i always have like i have a studio now, i have an office over at oprah, i've worked with a bunch of different people, i have an office in downtown, so we have places, different zones of work, right.  at that moment, making the spinning chair, i was actually in my corporate office at [company] which is actually a studio like this, but in a corporate building and you know the phone rings and it’s a curator from [city 3] and she says, "i need to put you in a show.  what do you got? i need to know right now."  you know, and i just made it up.  i said i got this spinning chair, i look out and see the chair, i say i got this spinning chair that turns into a goblet, the most amazing thing.  and then she said, "it's in the show," and i said fantastic, hang up the phone, i called my fabricator and i called my mechanic and i said, hey i have this project i have this spinning chair that turns, but like the whole thing was done in like two minutes.  and it was right.  there was nothing wrong about that piece.  the name, the title, the story all that stuff was encapsulated and iterated around the inception of that moment, but that wasn't a situation where i was like hmm, transformation, transformation, transformation, maybe a sofa?  maybe a bed?  oh, it’s the chair!  it wasn't like that at all.  you know, in terms in like the inception of that work it was like an instant... a lot of the great works in my sculpture practice, and so now i'm learning to trust that more because also there's a heavy, the humility that distrusts that level of gesture making, you know, for me that has sort of this internal dialogue which is why the iteration one provides more comfort because its an excuse. like, iterative thinking to me is a safety blanket to protect against mistakes, if you didn’t love mistakes, which i'm cool with.  and the rumination one is the philosophy of preventing mistakes from even happening because you're going to spend time thinking about it before so hopefully by the time its out, you know, you've done a lot of thinking about it.  but it’s a combination of like blitz chess and long-term chess, you know?  you gotta just think about it.  it's like that trust in presence, you know.  so i'm just learning that now.  something that’s always been an unegotiated boundary for the last fifteen years.   : no, i get asked that a lot and the answer is no.  i do have, i don’t have a regimented self at all.  i think i get bored.  in everything from my physical workout routine, so usually in the winter or january, i do some type of regimented physical workout routine, like p90x or something, something in january to try to get in shape.  i get super bored of that by the summertime, so in the summer i usually ride my bike, distance or running distance, and in wintertime i'm just trying to get to the end of the year, healthy with some type of robust physical presence, but it always changes and its always do that.  my routine is to not have a routine.  there are small systems i have to make sure i accomplish things and make sure i don't forget things, like little email systems i have, but there's nothing that regimeneted about idea creation or process in that way.  i have process people around me that arrange processes and projects once we get something going, but i don’t personally have that.   : i have a very long working memory, i think... : well i think i do.  but i do think and i do know and think its conditional upon triggers, right?  so, i don’t know this for a fact because we never tested him, but my brother has a photographic memory.  i have a long-term sort of responsive memory, but again, it triggers.  for example, i can see a slide of a tank being dropped into an ocean, now 15 or 16 years ago, i know exactly what the slide looks like and when i get that phone call, that's the first thing that’s on recall even though i hadn't thought about it in 8 years or hadn't been apart of my daily lexicon in 8 years.  i don’t have a lot of pin boards up.  other people have a lot of pin boards.  i have subjective pin boards when i do need something, will pin up... like this i have because this is a project that's due a week ago, you know.  its all subjective and sort of like working, so i believe, but the truth will find out, you should tell me my results.  i think that my working methodology is based on trying to have, that’s the more appropriate word, i try to have a large working lexicon.  kit bashing thing.  if i don't have pieces, we aren't making something interesting but when i'm working with magic and art and there's a component that doesn’t fit, but i realize there's a thing with the music business that i can put in there to make is fit, you know i have these tools that are available to go do that.  curator was in here this morning asking me some advice about something, we were talking about organizational development projects and i was bringing a little story from you know an oprah circumstance, a story from a 15 years old music business circumstance and you know deep river story, and you put all that together, next thing you know there's an assemblance of a solution there.  i guess that hopefully i'm successful, but that is absolutely one of the things i aspire to consider. : yeah, i don't know how, let's figure that out. : ok, i didn't study for this either just so you know. (laughter)  : artistic wise, creative wise? that's a big question. so lets see. exhibition wise? : i think what i am most proud of is that i am able to make the work so that i set my life up so that it's always been my priority.  i have a job that allows me to do the things and i am not so dependent on selling the things i so i can make things as hairbrained as i need them to be.  :  yeah, i think when i was first introduced to clay i was a desperately shy student in junior high and they put me in a class and there was a wheel back there and then after that i always enrolled in classes and then when i went to college, i am first generation working class, first to go to college and so i told my parents that i would do graphic design but secretly did ceramics as well so i double majored. : they sort of knew, but they didn't know there was a job prospect so they would get pots and stuff, you know functional things, they liked that. they never that would be what was going to happen. they thought i was going to work with computers. i don't think they really understood either.  : probably working with my hands and not having to answer to any one. there are no answers. : there's never a requirement to fulfill it could be anything. it's really open. : it depends on the project. sometimes i do for the things that are more functional. they are oriented towards being utilitarian so you take the user into account. for the things that are more sculptural, there are very little restrictions.  : i think it is a combination of my interaction with the material, my latest stuff and the installations that are growing, it has to do with constantly being active. so to make the pieces, i am like a production worker, fabricating these things as fast as humanly possible. and then to see all of those in a space and as it grows it reconfigures i think it gets really exciting. so the work has become less about the processed studio practice line in the studio fabrication and more about getting into a space and configuring those objects within that space to make an impact.  : that's a good question, for this last one that has been growing i put certain confines on myself so when i am invited to exhibit that particular work, it can only be exhibited if it grows so i have to add at least 5000 pieces to it for it to seem like because its about [city 1] and its about growth and sprawl and each time its installed it’s a bigger piece. it has to seem like its grown.  : that makes sense.  : i think it has to do with personality, i am just very active, my personality, the way that i am is always moving and active and i feel like i am surrounded by things and everything is really active and that's the way that i am in the studio. i say it makes sense because on a coupe of different levels there is a skill base. makers they have a skill base so in order to get to a certain skill base you have to make a whole lot of a bad stuff to make good stuff. i also think in terms of conceptual development, you have to make things to get to the next idea. you work through a lot of things.  : yeah you have an idea or concept your trying to achieve, and you can only really tell if that work achieves that idea or concept when it's finished through all the stages.  : ummm yeah it makes sense.  : yeah that makes sense. you finish with that idea and then you can move on to something else.  : i think in terms of the work, i spent a couple of years, doing production pottery. so i came from a background of doing very functional craft oriented utilitarian objects and in doing that i recognized that was not what i wanted to do. so i developed a certain skill base in doing that so i was able to get past what would of maybe have taken years to understand without having had that experience.  : it was about 2/3 years. so i worked for a couple of production potters in [city 2] so i would go and throw their forms and glaze their stuff and do the things they would within their studios and then i would see how their lives were and what they did to make a living so it was a good lesson to realize that's not how i saw my work or my life being.  : that's a good question, i knew there was something but i didn't know exactly what it was. i knew, it had to do with more education and the ability to experiment and it didn't seem like the people i was working had the time to do those things because they were always having to fill this order or do this thing they had already committed to and they always would talk about how i wish i could make something else or do something else or i wish i had more time to do these other things that were no really answers to.  : i do a lot of functional stuff but it's usually for things for other people, i wouldn’t chose to do it. like right now i am working on with my students there's a fundraiser at school for [famous musician]'s coming. my school had contacted me saying wouldn't it be great to have your students make some centerpieces for this [famous musician] thing and i just thought so they're students and they're not donating anything so unless your paying them, so we figured out some kind of thing where we ended up making a mold of the violin which is a smaller version of a cello and so we were able to fit those kind of students into this so they can get the cast of the cello out of the mold and do something with that. so were making like 45, 50 of these things. but i would never do that, like you couldn't pay me to do that. (laughter)  : yeah the commission stuff is utilitarian based. bowls or things that people can use. the other things are bought and sold after they exist in the world.  : yeah oh definitely. definitely if i have an exhibition deadline and i have been invited to do a show or something like that, i feel the pressure to make something and i am more productive in that way. yeah but the commission stuff it always feels like work. : does it feel different in terms of time spent in the studio? :  a little bit, it's a little more intense, you know because of my process it's not just like you make the thing and then it goes out. you have to make the thing, let it dry at a certain rate and then you fire it, and then there's another stage where you have to glaze everything, and then there's another stage where you have to load it and fire it again. you know you really have to work very quickly since there are so many stages. so yeah, it's much more intense than if i am just creating on my own timeline.  : yeah. sometimes you know ballpark. so if you have a concept usually i work in threes and there related by color so i have to have those three related by color in order for it to be a complete idea to me. i just lost my train of thought.  : the basis of my work, the metaphor i  use is primary colors so to me as a metaphor for race you can make any color from these three colors and so it's about the mixture of these colors and so i use yellow, blue and red for my work and so there will be one piece yellow, blue and red with the idea being that those three pieces can create any color. : i have always been like on the, my mother is [ethnicity 1], i have an older brother that's [ethnicity 2], my father is [ethnicity 3]and i have younger brother who is half and half like me so it's totally background oriented.  : yeah, it's always been. yeah. : i think that came in college when i was thinking a little bit differently about the work. so probably the first real pieces out of grad school. or you know mixtures of colors like you know blue yellow and green or something like that.  : that's a good question. i talk to my students all the time about this stuff because you know there getting advanced degrees in art and you know everyone's path is completely different. and i wouldn’t necessarily want them to follow exactly how i've done things and i think sometimes school is not for everyone so i think for each student i am interacting with i guess we come up with some kind of trajectory that is significant to them. like what they want to do. do they want to be a potter, do they want to teach, do they want to be an artist, do they want to work in a non profit sector. : honestly it depends on their work and their work ethic. for some of them they're better suited for different arenas. : i don't know how to answer that. i think the balance is coming from a background where everyone worked, everyone works, that in combination, i feel i am that working class person but i am just doing things that don't fit within that framework. so that is to say you know my parents always worked in factories and going to college i would go home for the summer and work in factories and i think  the way i work in the studio is very similar to that. there is a certain level of production to it.  : i think there is a physicalness that makes sense. like your interacting with the work, like you're not absent from the work. i don't often ponder the work to a certain extent.  and i have artist friends that will think a lot about the work and think and think and think and that's actually the most important part of the work for them. is thinking about the work. so often they will conceive the idea and many times not even fabricate or have a hand in the creation of the work. they would just as well have a crafts person create the work they have conceived of. so they are part philosopher/part artist. : i don't think i fall within that category i don’t think i over intellectualize the work. i think its very meaningful for me to fabricate the work at this point. i don't know when my physical ability changes as i get older i don't know what my equation is going to be but for right now it's very important to me that i am the maker of that work.  : i hope it doesn't sound crazy. i talk to people sometimes, you know, people that are not in my field and they sometimes try to follow along and i feel like they understand but i don’t think they understand completely. they just let the conversation go at some point. just what it is (laughter).  : it's not a missing thing, i think for many people maybe their definition of success has some tie to financial bottom lines or some kind of fame or fortune or something and that’s not the total, those are not necessarily my bottom line. so my accountant the tax guy will say why do you do this?  : i tell him i have to. i actually for me my professional activity is tied to my teaching position. if i am not active in my field and i am not exhibiting and being active in my work, how qualified am i to be talking to young people about their futures and their paths. : you know the way things are set up i wouldn't need to hold the teaching position and i am not dependent on my income from teaching i would still do the same things in the studio. i feel the teaching feeds the studio practice at this point.  : i think because there is not, to some there might not be a significant understanding on what the point of it is. the installations that i produce right, there are thousands of pieces and when those are not installed in a space they don’t exist at art. they reside in little bins, color coated little bins and they are in storage and it isn't until they're in a space and for that time that there in that space that they exist as art. they don't sometimes understand the merit of that i would think. i am guessing now. people have not told me this.    : yeah it's hard to put my finger on it. if i wasn't making work in the studio i would be doing something else. i would be working on the house. just doing something. making something. mixing something. it's just a need to be moving and active.  : i can't remember what my drive was when i was younger. i was always in sports and i think it's probably my parents, my parents were always working. we would cut trees down in the backyard for vacation. they were always doing something, always working. my mother would, i remember when i was younger, she would buy these old pieces of furniture that were ripped and she figured out a way to reupholster them and she had a restaurant. she doesn't read or write english. she would just do these things, she wasn't afraid of these things and she was always doing something. so maybe that rubbed off. always had a garden, always cooking....  : i do have that thing where everything can be replaced or you know if you try to fix something and you can't and there is someone who can but you just try. so i will pull things apart. my partner, her navigation system went out in her lexus and she wanted me to take it apart and fix it because you know cause she thinks i can fix it and i did. but then she had to take it in and get it fixed. (laughter) you know i did all the research, and there were wires and i had a little mechanical pen to fix the wire.  : most people would not do that. i don't think anyone i know would do something, and i am not an electronics person. : i don't think there is a difference but history tells that there is a difference. the medium that i work in only became an official medium and that’s debatable to create sculpture or art in the late 50/early 60s and it was dominated by men because there is a certain physicality to the work and so that's where i think the beginnings were different. still now i think it's a little bit different. you often don’t see women creating these large things that you would need to have a certain physical capacity to do so they will tend to work smaller. i also feel it affects me too because i like to think of the work as monumental but i do them in modular units. you know when i was first starting out i tried to make those big and there is only a certain point you go and that's just in terms of scale.  : all of it. firing it, moving it, building it, interacting with it. yeah. even the large modular units, there is a certain weight that these things have and your carrying and your installing. so yeah i think it is a restriction for people who are making their work and installing their work. you can always hire people to do things.  : i don' think anymore, i think female artist are more brave and more willing to experiment now and they are making a lot of conceptually based work.  :  i am not sure i am understanding the question. : yeah i've learned to balance. yeah i have had relationships where my priorities were different. as i gotten older i have learned what an incredible compromise a relationship is and so that's had to change a little bit.  like i am not always working on my own time. you know i also don't have children and family responsibilities. my family is far away so i can always go on a plane for a few days and then i come back so it's definitely in the past has been a conflict but now i am grown up. (laughter) and i'm better, i'm not perfect but better, definitely better. you would probably need to ask that question to my partner though. she would probably give a different answer.  : she would probably want me to be more business minded with the work and make things that are more appealing in terms of interior design or you know have a business model for the work so we talk a lot about how you know and maybe she'll if she is teaching me, i am learning a lot from her, in time the business model conversation will make more sense to me but right now it's not negotiable.  : how the work is received?  : i think that's always been the case.  : there are a handful of artists that i really appreciate and that's because of it's impact in the experience it offers. [artist 1] is one. she is a sculptor that works with lots of different kinds of found materials and she will create these spaces that are excessive but that use the material in a way that you would never think. for instance, one of the pieces i am thinking of is a wall of straws that are stacked up and they are not straws till you get up close to them but it's just like this experience. or styrofoam cups that fill a ceiling and they undulate and it's like this cloud you know your like in this different crazy environment and as then as you inspect the material she is using it's a styrofoam cup. or like a city made out of pencils, or like a huge square made out of thousands of pins. : it's i guess, the multiple is interesting to me. lots of objects in a space to create something different that aren't maybe recognizable. so it's one thing when you look at it from afar and it's something very different when you get up close and that's a whole other level that your experiencing it at. : you know i don't know. i don't know where that comes from. i like to think i can make a tie to the factory work or back to the way you know my family was but i don't know what it is. : yeah forces and terms of my personality and the work? : umm i don't know. when we were younger she brought her 11 brothers and sisters over from [country 1] and they to this day there is some of them that still don't speak english but they lived with us for a little bit until they got a house and then growing up we had a lot of interaction with them so there was always so many people around. lots of talking, lots of language you didn't understand really so that might have had an impact just in terms of the way that i interact with people or my interest in diversity. : yeah and they all couple off and they have kids and their kids have kids and there is just a lot of people all the time.  : i have an older brother and a younger brother. : no my older brother is a union iron worker in [state 1] and my younger brother sells zero radius lawnmowers. they both live in [state 1]. : yeah so if you're driving you can actually turn this thing all the way around without turning around.  : a little bit but i am not super close with my brothers.  : that's a good question. probably mostly in a formal way like it fills a space in a certain way.  : yeah even within the standalone pieces there is a certain formal thing your trying to do with the work.  : form itself. : or if it's moving in a certain way or if there is enough activity. : yeah. : well some of them, they are abstract. i don't know what it is it's just even the standalone pieces have so much activity to them and so your trying to achieve a balance of that activity while holding a certain kind of space or scale. : yeah.  : a little bit. a little bit. yeah but the process itself has it's own deadline so you know.  : that's a good question. like what work to make next?  : yeah. sometimes you get information from the pieces you completed. like something is working or something is not working more likely and so you will do a series of pieces maybe trying to capture the things that are working.  : could be both. either. : yeah. i mean but because i always have that functional background to fall back on i will just make things. make things that i don’t have to, that aren't too conceptually oriented, so i will throw a bunch of bowls or you know make some plates or make some dinnerware.  : yeah i am always, yeah i will go into the studio every day to do something. even if i am not working on my work if it's something for the house. : it depends on what projects you have. like right now i am doing some stuff with 3d printing so it's like i don't know what it is yet but i am printing and i am investigating stuff and it's not, i wouldn't consider it my work yet. so that's taken up a lot of time trying to figure out what that is or if it's anything.  : yeah it's interesting because they made it so accessible to people who aren't very sophisticated in terms of like, don't have a lot of computer savvy. so they have apps that you wouldn't need to necessarily know a lot about cad or any of the math or stuff so those are some of the apps that i am learning. or just even what it is you know because everyone is talking about 3d printing changing the world and it's there incorporating it into curriculum and i just wanted to understand what it is and whether it fits my curriculum or would be a good tool for my students.  : yeah it's not so. it's not like you can just push things or make things. you know your not working with you hands so your very restricted so right now what i am doing is digitizing my own work that's fabricated in the studio so you put it on this thing and there lasers shoot at it and it makes a computer file out of it and then you can take it into a different computer program and scale it and print it and the printing is out of what is called pla plastic, it's like this rigid plastic and you can print in different colors. so but i don't know what it is, it's very frustrating so i am spending a lot of time doing that which is exciting because i don't know what it is.  : yeah it's like a puzzle. and there is a certain like emotion to it right? but your not, cause when i go into the studio i am pretty confident in terms of the knowledge that i have and the things i can and can't do and the things that are going to work and the things that are not going to work. but with something like that i don't know what the result is going to be or what's really going to work or what's not going to work.  : well not anxiety but it’s a little bit frustrating because you don't know where it fits into your framework even if it does so you can be wasting all this time.  : i think it's part material and part maybe abstract inspiration so a lot of my work has a connection to plants or like succulents, or things that grow and clump in multiples so i can make a connection back to those things. for a long time i was going to all these [region 1] cactus meetings. people would talk about their collections and have been to these native habitats. these people were way into cactus and succulents and i was very interested in that for a long time. and then i was done.  : i'm not sure i totally understand the question. : i think it would combine in terms of, so i guess there is a physical memory in terms of how you make? and the skills necessary to make a certain thing? whether your throwing or hand building or assembling so i guess you would combine that physical memory with whatever your concepts are.  : i don't think i dwell on it. : yeah it's not something i think about, i think it just happens because you have a certain set of skills or certain knowledge of how to make and so those are the things you bring to the ideas i think.  : yeah i mean i use a lot of, like when i get into a space if i am going to set up an installation i will use photoshop to put the installation together so i will take all the measurements and i'll actually visually put the work in the space or draw out the work, how the work is to go in the space. yeah i sketch a lot of things.  : yeah it gives me an idea of color and how color fits together. : yeah so even within a space, however the space is set up i will have to have the three colors interacting within that space so that they have that ability to produce any color. so i will always like you know if one section has a pile of red objects on the floor it will also need to touch like a blue object and a yellow object.  : i don't think so. maybe naiveté (laughter) : yeah. maybe. i don't know i don't think i am much different than most people. maybe i am. i don't know why i am saying that. (laughter) : yeah i think that is a strength. yeah i don't think i am absent minded. i have been told a few times that i am but i don't think i am absent minded.  : yeah. : i would absolutely say that's me. i have projects that have been going on years and years.  : like the installation i was talking about, the one that you add pieces that has been going on for several years.  : i am not sure! i mean i hope it ends! (laughter) everybody wants it to. even my friends ask when is this going to stop? you know because i am not finding enough fulfillment in fabricating the pieces to grow this thing. so at a certain point it's like oh i have to exhibit this thing again. i need to make another 5000 pieces but i have made that structure for myself so i have to follow that guideline. and it's not until after i get into the space that i find the value in it.  : no. synecdoche new york? : yeah. : yeah it sounds interesting! : yeah that's interesting. i would think that if you were completely uninhibited it would be hard to make work. if you were coming new every time to the work. so i would guess that i would love to be a person that's uninhibited, what a free life that would be but i don't think i am as uninhibited as i would want to be. yeah i don’t know about that whole, artists are like they do these things and they are all over the place and i think those people that do those one time works of art that go down in history, maybe that's genius. maybe they just have that one thing in them. i don't know.  : yeah i definitely have my vocabulary that i work from.  : no. i'll try things. yeah but you know. it's like the 3d printing you just don't know. like your trying it but you don’t know. it's a lot to invest in something that's not going to pan out. but maybe it does. i feel like everything i do i learn a little something from like those darn cellos. making that thing is a nightmare. (laughter) : i am sorry this might be mind numbing. : of the creative process of the work. i think in terms of the field what's different about some of the work is the effort to be not so tied to the history of the field and the background meaning that ceramics has been this thing that has a certain i don't know stigma to it that if you talk to people that are potters or crafts people there is a certain marginalization that they feel so i feel my work is personally tied to that history but is partially not tied to that history.  : yeah i feel there is a certain responsibility to the material that is to say that one of the most famous ceramic artists is ken price and he was someone who became known for making ceramic work but then taking automotive paint to it to create these fetish, very slick beautiful surfaces so for the clay community that was very taboo because he wasn't using glaze or wasn’t firing this to an end result in a kiln so the material was not pure not completely honest. it didn't fall in line with the ceramic world. but he was really someone who was able to transcend that boundary. he was recognized by the greater art world, not part of people who work in clay or ceramics. to me that process is still very important like i would never spray paint my work or i would never use a material that doesn't have a certain what i would define as integrity in your relationship and commitment to the material. it sounds terrible. (laughter)  : i would think that you know that the new thing is that the people that are now getting recognized for working in clay are people that are coming to the material from a completely different background and they are using it in a very naive way and it has very little to do with formal training and craftsmanship. so that is not part of their relationship with the material so they are making these objects that are very hands on or to a clay person or a person that is seasoned in the skill of the material, a crafts person they look at that work and it's hard for them to see the merits of that work but those are the people that are getting the recognition from you know the greater art world. it's just like look at how receptive this work is and the artists hand is in it.  : i think it's great. i think it's great for people to talk about the work that is being made out of this material and it doesn't necessarily need to be tied to that history.   : yeah it's a bad relationship. (laughter) : yeah. i mean i guess i wish i was someone that could not have that responsibility to my material sometimes and i don't know what its going to be like in the years ahead and i recognize the merits of not being so tied to that relationship. i am just like understanding this for myself right now from this conversation. (laughter) : i know! i hate it! the whole electronic stuff but i feel i need to know it. i feel like i need to have some understanding of it. because that's the way the worlds going.  : yeah. : yeah. i don’t know. maybe this 3d printing thing is going to make me add different materials to the work. i don't know. it's unsettling. (laughter) : yeah. : yeah. : i don’t know. i think we touched on a lot.  : no you know i always want to do the best that i can do. if i think back you know i should of. i don't know what i would have done differently but you always feel like oh i wish i had done better and not feel you don't even know how to succeed in this thing but i wish i had done better or i had completed all of the things or had answered more things. so but it was so interesting. so interesting. : i think the one part where you were giving you words and i was supposed to give you words to respond to the word.  : and you gave the same set a second time and how i thought other people would respond to the word and then the third time when i could imagine how they would not respond to that word. i find that one really interesting. so is there any measurement? the results of the test. are you able to measure?  : yeah it could have some impact. i have been thinking about this whole thing. but to me i just think that everybody is so interesting. everybody has their stories and you know i wonder how different people that are makers, you know i would call people, your interacting with people that make things and what separates them from people who don't make is that there making things. i don't know how.  : yeah. : yeah. i mean i just see, there are probably so many factors. i look at my mom and i feel like if she had access to education she would be completely different because i just feel like there is more going on. when she was younger, the things that she would do i would just find amazing. just her ability to tackle things. you know she doesn't read or write, doesn't have any education i just think, i don't see that in a lot of people. and just because she hasn't had a quantifiable creative spectrum i think she is one of the most creative people i have ever seen.  : yeah. i think a lot of people have that. (laughter)  : oh, um, wow, i am always the most engaged with that i'm doing currently, and so i'm usually, if its significantly different from what i've done before, i'm usually really excited about that, and proud i don't know. that’s a funny word. like right now, i would say i'm really excited about the fact that i've been interested in collective memory and so i've been doing work that's more community engaged and i've been interviewing a lot of people about these kind of, you know they call them flashbulb memories sometimes, these sort of public events that people experience as personal experiences. like you know the too contemporary one would be september 11th but jfk assassination with a older demographic. and so that's taken me into communication with this enormous audience of people that maybe don't even necessarily like contemporary art or go to galleries or museums, and i've been making drawings based on historical images, often iconic ones, and i wouldn't say i was particularly proud of the drawings, they're kind of illustrations, they’re probably the kind of drawings i was taught not to make in art school. but the project itself has gotten me out of sort of like the art ghetto because the drawings are very sort of accessible and unlike my more abstract or symbolic or like coded work, people without any art background can understand them, and so they've been very forthcoming of sharing often deeply personal memories with me with the drawings as these kind of retrievals cues are like triggers for involuntary memory. and so, for me, spending my whole career in sort of the art world that's been really exciting. and i guess i'd say, so i could say an emotion like proud cause i'm proud to have like gotten out of this tiny subculture and been able to engage this much larger audience.  formally and technically and aesthetically, i don't necessarily think that it's the most visually innovative work i've ever done or necessarily even the most challenging in any of the ways that would make you feel pride, so it's only against the context of sort of working within this one sort of small domain and finding a way to interact with all these other people that’s made me, it's like reenergized my interdisciplinary background in anthropology and other things i'm interested in. so i would say that project right now but if i was on my deathbed and i was reviewing my whole career, i don’t know what i'll say.  : yeah, but i mean i think at any point, you know like my work's fundamentally interdisciplinary so i usually feel the most excited when as an artist that allows me to enter a world that i don't actually have the background or the credentials, so if you would ask me five years ago i would have said, the mapping of my neural associations because that allowed me to spend two years working in the neurology department at [college 1] and to go behind the scenes of a world where i was sixteen years short of the amount of education that i would have needed to be there, and you know to have macarthur fellow [person 1] show me around the pathology part of the brain and spend half a day with me on two person microscopes and, you know that would have, i would have said that was the most exciting thing, that was breaking me out of the art ghetto so i think whatever allows me to do that in a new way i'm gonna feel like pretty pleased with myself that i got invited in.  : i think for me like i see art in a way as a large umbrella definition that lets me continue to pursue interests in all these other things, and probably part of that drive would have just been fear of boredom. like even the fields that seem the most challenging and exciting when you're in school, you know you look back when people have been in that career for thirty years and there's a certain amount of repetition or there's a certain amount of parts that can be tedious, but for me, i get to activate a whole new discipline every few years and because of the credibility i hopefully have from my work, i can enter at a very high level. so i think that’s part of it, like my joke is always, if i wasn't an artist i would have been this person that never got out of school and kept changing their major and taken twenty years to get out. but also, i also feel like a lot of the disciplines that i'm really interested in don't allow for a first-person point of view, like subjectivity is not really part of their paradigm and so for me to come in as an artist i'm bringing that. like i'm comfortable with and encouraged to have subjectivity in approaching my projects and i can talk in a first-person point of view when we're talking about something that’s as supposedly objective as history of science. so that’s interesting to me, the conversation between supposed bias towards subjectivity or objectivity of the two disciplines coming together.  : well i mean i was trained as an anthropologist, so the bias towards supposed objectivity at least in anthropology was apparent at the time. right after i got out of school, i think is when a more introspective like institutional critique of the social sciences came in. people started doing more dialogical anthropology where they would talk about their status as an outsider in this culture. but i was trained in a discipline where the whole premise was that you as a kind of european origin outsider would come into this other culture and in eighteen months have insight into it that was greater than the participants and so that politicized it pretty early on, and when i was doing my undergraduate honors thesis. so i was at [college 2] and i went to [college 3] because i was really interested in pueblo and navajo culture and that’s what my thesis was about, and i sort of went there to do it. and so i was writing this paper, and it was an undergraduate thesis it wasn't very advanced or anything, but i was taking a lot of native american studies classes where i would be the only anglo in the class, so the kids would, i few of them liked me but they made fun of me a lot, like kids would tell a joke in english, i had a class called navajo nation and everyone else was navajo, and they'd tell a joke in english and then they'd tell the punchline in navajo and make me buy a them a beer to tell me it in english and stuff like that –laughs-. so everybody at the end of that class was doing a project about their family and they were like really cool projects. like their uncle was a silversmith and he taught them how to do it over, make silver jewelry over a fire and they showed us in the courtyard, and i was going to do a research paper and it was going to be so lame. and so instead i like every weekend this friend of mine and i we went camping all over the navajo reservation looking for places that were described in contemporary native american literature, and then i would draw them. and so i put those paintings up on the wall and drawings with the little texts from the novels and people didn't really care about my idea but they were like, "i know where that is" or "that's near my cousin's place" or "that's near fort defiance", and all these kids that i desperately you know admiring and really interested in, they were like, "oh you're really good at drawing. can you draw my husband for his birthday?" and i was like oh this is way better than being an anthropologist, cause i was allowed to be me and everybody was really interested and they were letting me in in this deeper way and we were having a dialogue. so it sort of all started from that.  : i mean there's more trauma that i'm not including which was like at the time there were a lot of colonialist biases in anthropology which i felt really guilty about as a twenty-year-old taking that on. but i've always liked the way that as an artist i have this kind of like really like social passport to go into almost any group of people and since you're not an anthropologist and you're not a detective and you're not a journalist you don't have an agenda, and people are usually pretty interested to see what you might make out of, or just the fact that you're interested in what they do, and so that, i like making things a lot, but for me that’s been, i don't know that that would have engaged me my whole life if i couldn't add this other part of the sort of open ended research project into, i would never be an anthropologist culturally again that became problematic for me, but doing it between occupations where there's no status difference is really interesting to me.  : no i just think it's relations –laughs-. : i mean i was trained as a social scientist but i also, when i was collaborating with this musician that i was telling you about, it was really interesting for five or six years i had somebody there in the museum with me at twelve am you know working alongside me and i'd never really had, i'd never had somebody, it's kind of like what you're saying about the drugs people say they did and drugs that are in their urine, i have all these things i say about how i work and where my ideas come from and it's all very rigorous and sort of systematic and she with her sitting next to me for five years i learned that i don’t i make a lot of intuitive decisions or aesthetic decisions because she said i think you start with that as your operating system but then when you're working you'll take something down and you'll rehang it and i'll come over and ask you why did you do that and you'll say it looked wrong there and she said you have all these two-thirds that’s you're very logical methodology and then you have this other one-third that i don’t know if you're even aware of that's sort of intuitive or aesthetic or you know like you can't really define where you have some kind of insight or some kind of vision and you don’t talk about that part but i've never seen you make anything that's stuck to the two-thirds plan so, and i didn't know that until we worked together really side by side.  : i just, i think like, i just own it a little bit more, you know i just acknowledge that like i set up these systems but again like unlike somebody who's from the sciences, they’re my systems they don't have to do with the validity of the project, i can break the rules or ignore them whenever i want, i mean not more than a certain amount. like when i'm doing these interview-based projects there's a certain amount of documentary um ethics that i try to observe, i would never make up something somebody said or significantly edit their words to make the meaning be changed, you know there are certain things like that. but um, but the rules that i made up i can change much as i want. so for example, in one of those catalogues i was making these, they were sort of, i guess you would probably call them networks of spreading semantic activation but i called them memory networks, they taught me. so these are home movies, i was working with the home movies that my father shot, from when i was, when he was courting my mom and them like the first day i came home from the hospital, actually my pregnant mom going into the hospital and the baby me coming out, until i'm about six, and it perfectly replaced my period of like early childhood amnesia so i was really fascinated with these eight millimeter films because they were exactly from the period that i don't remember and they were sort of part of my self-narrative but they weren't from my point of view and even though i didn't remember the events in the videos, like they were birthday parties and skiing and going to the beach, i remembered a lot of people or animals or places. so this was a sculpture that was based on movies of three of my early birthday parties, like age one and three and five that i didn't remember. and then these like little led lit plastic nodes were originally based on, well i think in this sculpture it was pretty literal so they were based on everything, every person place or thing or taste or smell, like at the birthday parties we had those little chocolate and vanilla ice cream cups that you eat with a piece of wood. so i made these drawings and i mapped them out and that was basis for the sculptures, so everything that i thought of as i was looking at the movies but like, for example, we used one of them in these fmri experiments with [person 2] so when i play it now, i remember being in the scanner and going to [city 1] and so that also, i'm really interested in the way that you're always creating these more synaptic connections and so that's how that started out but i made one of these installations in idaho two weeks ago and it was much more um loose. it was more like the shape of how the memory looked to me and it was much less literal one to one mapping, so as the project went on, after i had already done that, it drifted away from original sort of more systematic process.  : but a lot of artists work that way, that’s very common since the conceptual art movements of the 70's for artists to work in these, like there are artists like [person 3] who never even made the work themselves, just sent a set of instructions and people executed them in the gallery and that was a big part of conceptual art movement.  : yeah, and i would say by the time they’re not, by the time i've abandoned the system, the project is probably over and i'm probably just recreating something on invitation with what's true, what's true in idaho, that's worked from five years ago that i said i would recreate cause it was a show about the brain but um, yeah. so when i'm actively engaged with it is when i'm trying to be the most faithful to my process. like this was a city that i made a couple years ago in [city 2] this um, misremembered buildings and it was pretty faithful to the way the buildings are in my mind, like you'll recognize cause you live here, [building 1] which somehow in my mind, like i'm surprised whenever i see it is extremely elongated but that’s, i think that’s the right number of floors but it's really squat and i didn't really even notice that till i saw it again after building that, um and now this, i'm making something for [airport 1] for this summer and i'm just making the buildings up, they’re sort of more impressionistic based on lots of stored buildings in my mind, yeah. : right and this is another project for them, so it sort of becomes, like in the beginning i think they were just about me learning something in the studio, but now the one for [airport 1] it's for a specific part of [airport 1] where you come out of customs and you got your bags back and you're about to recheck them for your connecting flight so it's only for people who are disoriented from a long international flight and [city 3] is not their final destination, and so it's that strange state of mind you know i'm sure you travel internationally, where you’re in a connecting city but you don’t even really go there and so there's this sense where you're in this subliminal space so i'm gonna make a city that a mashup of all these buildings from other cities but some of them are made up and some of them have aspects of different buildings, hopefully either people are going to be so consumed with their travels that they won’t even notice it or it will completely sync with their state of mind. but you know like in the beginning of this project i couldn't have made something as focused on the audience, i was more focused on my process of trying to like systematically represent the fragmentation and distortions of my memories of shared spaces.  : yeah, i think so : yeah, i think so. i mean i take photographs if it’s a real building and i visited it, but i don't really use them as a reference as much as like a retrieval cue to remember what it was like to stand at the building. so sometimes like, this is gonna sound nutty, but i'll look at a photograph i took of the building but i'll be like oh the photograph is wrong. that’s not really how the building is in my head. so it's more just cause it’s a very effective way to travel back to the space.  : i mean tactile in the sense of scale and i’ll think about how i felt you know looking at the thing, like there's a building that i was in love with in [city 4] that’s been torn down so i went on purpose to see it in 2010 knowing i would never get to see it again, i haven't let myself go back to [city 4] since then. and so um, and then there's a sort of long large series of installations, it was called [installation 1], it belonged to [college 4], and so there's this series of pieces that i've been working on that have to do with just sort of like teasing it apart and watching it distort over time, and so for that i actually i walked around it, like i usually walk around a building from all four sides and then because they were starting to raise the whole neighborhood, it's sort of on [street 1], it's really expensive real estate, there was a empty block in between it and a seven story parking garage so i was able to go to every story of the parking garage and look at it and photograph it from each height and so working on that, that wound it being hugely important, there's like this emotional part about this building that i love being torn down, there's a series of these he did a building that’s now [hospital 1], there's one in [city 5] that’s on the 10, and there's one called [hospital 2], another one in [state 1] that i didn't see but i went and saw all the other ones. so all of those experiences are part of my, go into the works about the buildings so the difference between standing on the ground and looking up at it, being a block away looking at it from these different heights, the building in [city 5] which i first saw from the freeway and then i asked to be taken there once when i was doing something at [college 5], the building in [city 6] where we actually went in and they let us see like the birthing suites and look at the building from the inside so, so i have this like phenomenological relationship but, and i remember if it was hot or cold that day or you know if i was standing in the shadows or if it was night, but not, otherwise i wouldn't say tactile or olfactory. like i know when we went in the hospital there must have been smells but i don't remember them.  : umm, i don't know, i guess i would be the wrong one to answer, you know cause i don't, the main thing, the main blindness i have is i don't know what other people see when they see the work. so even when i look at it, a lot of the time, unless, until it becomes really old and i kind of can't remember the experience of making it, but for work from the past five or ten years i'm so um, it's its own retrieval cue of the process of making it usually, and i think about my intentions and i think about what happened but i often sort of can't see it.  : oh...umm...i mean i guess, you know,...obstacles...i guess time you know, i wish i had more time, like there's things i want to do and my work is very very labor intensive and i guess i'm more aware of this now but i don't know if i would have said this if i was younger but there's more things that i want to do than i can do in a year, every year. and sometimes i'll work, i'll have other people help me with the work and that’s not really the real answer because then instead of being hands on in this sort of intimate meditative move, process of making something you wind up being in this sort of supervisory role of getting people to carry out instructions that have to be pretty clear which is almost the opposite cognitive state. so i mean i guess the biggest obstacles is that you run out of time. it's more of a existential obstacle i guess. : no, it just makes me make different choices. like i think that i at a certain point i stop doing anything that i felt like was just paying dues or gonna help me in the future or was just to have a better more comfortable material um existence and so like maybe if you had asked me ten years ago i would have said oh i need more money or i need more recognition and now i just feel like, i get to do what i want so i just need more time to get to do everything i want and i don't, i you know, i do resent like time that i have to spend doing project management or accounting or, you know, things that are necessary for the financial side and i actually, i was thinking about this the other day, so then people who have regular jobs that have agreed to give up x amount of their day i can’t relate to that, like i don’t understand that at all, like that’s sort of mind-blowing to me like, like when they gotten to middle age wouldn't they freak out about all those hours -laughs- where they weren't moving their project forward, so i mean i guess my biggest obstacle is, you know, will i get to, will i get to do enough that i feel that it was enough.  : what is it? : oh i've heard of him, i think it sounds a little loopy. : yeah  : is it like a metaphysical event or something?  : hasn’t he been talking like this for like forty years? : like the aztec calendar or something. : so what did the other guy say? : i never feel like that yeah but it wouldn’t matter because i wake up every morning and i feel like the sun goes down too soon, so. i mean it's not a panicky feeling, it's just like that’s the obstacle that we all, at this point that trumps all the other obstacles, and i don't think i used to feel like that, i think i just sort of became aware of that we only have so much time recently-ish so you know like since i'm not in a wheel chair and i can see and use my hands and everything that seems like the one i'm bumping against. : yeah i am always looking for something that's challenging that will take me in a new direction.  : like something, a territory i haven't explored before or something that seems to be the next level of like awareness or understanding of a question i've been working on.  : so now, i want to try to bring these two bodies of work together and i don't really know how to do it. so i'm trying, which is sort of really interesting to me, like i can't solve it in my head and just point at it and say i want to do this but i know like i know from the past - so that always makes me feel a little bit uncomfortable - but that's the best thing, because i have to solve it somehow in the studio and that will mean some new thing that i can't imagine now is the answer but i want to i think, i mean it could go somewhere else like sometimes you go to solve one thing and something else happens which as an artist you don’t lose your funding if you do that usually so you're allowed to be open to it. but i think i want to create some experience of collective memory that brings the two, like the more narrative fieldwork-based illustration project and the more immersive sculptural experience together into a kind of environment that feels collective and personal. like the whole idea of looking for collective memory, i don’t even know if there is such thing as collective memory so, you know whatever's the next level of that, is what i'm really, i'm still really interested in it. because i do, like i think i figured out one thing is true. like there are shared experiences and public spaces that people experienced personally the same way they experience, and emotionally, the same way they experience a personal experience, like people feel like the kennedy assassination or september 11th happened to them the same way a death of a parent did or you know the same way a car accident did and there are places that people feel like that about that are public places that they feel as personally about as their home. but then i think there may be something more beyond that and i guess for me, like i guess i am interested in, one the reasons i want to take an empirical approach to these more like elusive or philosophical questions is i think it's just too easy to take a more dreamy or speculative approach, but it's really hard and interesting to me to try to find things that i can say that i'm sure about, about questions that otherwise people would just abandon and say you can't look at those questions and i think if i was, like i admire what you're doing because i think it's really really hard when you are restricted by external definitions of scientific method to do it. i don't have those constraints but i value that um rigor, so. and i think that there's a authenticity in the work that comes from it, even though it's not important to anyone but me that i have rigor.  : well you know what i mean, as an artist, like i can make beautiful things that talk about these ideas and they wouldn't have to necessarily be based on any of the stuff. it's kind of interesting backstory and people often say, "oh i'm much more interested in the work after talking to you," but i'm not there most of the time so it has to be able to function without that also.  : and half the people that experience it don’t even read anything about it.  : yeah they’re just getting something different that is different than what i - that’s why i say i can’t see it necessarily. and sometimes like i can read the reviews or people can email me and tell me stuff and sometimes when it aligns it's really gratifying but sometimes it's way more gratifying when it doesn't. like for example when i started working on my family home movies, i was really nervous, i had never done anything autobiographical in my life and um and i remember thinking this is the most self-absorbed project i've ever made and all i know for sure is that like when i see my grandmother walking across the room i feel like crying and i have all these emotions and other people just see this old german lady and they're not gonna have this you know. so, i was sort of going out on a limb because i had no idea what it would mean to an audience if they would care at all. and then like the really cool thing that happened over time was people would say to me "oh i read that thing about your work" or "i read the wall text" or "i went to your talk" or whatever and then i went into your installation and i was thinking about your family and your grandparents with alzheimer's and all these things that you talked about but then when i was in your installation i realized i felt really bad, i couldn't concentrate at all because i kept replaying my own childhood home movies or thinking about how we had a swing set like that or i just wanted one of those reveries like a mental time travel experience where i was in my own childhood maybe because the film stock is grainy, cause it’s the same quality light, i don't know, but that was like so much better right cause then the work was like a catalyst to them having this experience that had been the generative experience of me making it rather than an illustration or descriptive of me telling them that experience that i had and instead of being about my family, it really made them think about how their memory worked. and so that was so amazing, that wasn't why, i never would have ever thought of that that i was doing that right, and so that was so much better than what i thought i was doing that led me to be interested in collective memory and wondering can that happen more, does it only happen as a catalyst or is there some kind of a sense of fusion.   : yeah, so like i started drawing these like iconic historical images from the living memory past/ : because i was thinking like john john saluting is emotional even to people who weren't born yet which is weird like everybody, that’s just somehow iconic whereas for me actually we overlapped one year at brown so i just think of him as a senior like i can't see pictures of him without thinking of the times like seeing him around, but i think for like my assistants they're like oh yeah that's so sad and then they think he died or whatever but um so i started making these drawings so i was thinking what is a shared image that would be emotional like my family photos that would trigger a whole bunch of associations and would put the person back into that space of that time and you know function like the way that music or these old photos are these kind of involuntary memory cues that like that's why you have to set aside a whole day to go through like your grandparent's house because you're going to find all these things that are going to take you out of the present and lock you so firmly in this reverie memory space that it's almost overwhelming you know like you put off doing it. and so, i just started sort of stepwise you know thinking of things that i knew were iconic particularly to a certain age demographic and seeing and i thought well, drawing them is kind of reanimates them and gives them more of a personal feel, like i think we have a really good filters for not, like with the anniversary of the kennedy assassination we saw tons of tons of that stuff and it's fairly easy to filter out after the first one or two, but i figured the drawings were more, would hook them a little more so it was a little bit strategic so i was thinking like well this is the kind of drawings that you know people who even don’t really like art, like these kind of illustrations and so they could come to me and tell me stories cause they would say "oh my god i remember that day", that’s how it would always start. i remember that day and you know and this project was sort of focused on, it was at [location 1] so a lot of these works are about memory and place or a memory living in a place and that’s like nixon supporters waiting for him on the day that he resigned because this is where he flew into after leaving the white house. so you know, the first thing i drew was him on tv giving the resignation speech and people would say 'i remember that' and they would tell me 'you know i was a teenager and i watched all the hearings' or 'all the grown-ups were very serious and i went outside to play' you know people started telling me these stories and they didn’t tell me anything else, i didn’t know anything else about them they would just tell me like a personal story of something that is part of what they remember because of being timestamped with this famous event was that something that other people could also like make a network and hook in on that timeline so in a way it was sort of like looking, like i was able to cause this experience like sort of vicariously with my family home movies and i was trying to find things that people had an authentic connection to but make it be like the same experience but instead of it being like well that reminded me of my family movies, it was like i remember that day too because everyone does that with september 11th like if it comes up, you know it happens every fall everyone has to tell you where they were and what they were doing and how they found out and everyone tells those jfk stories if they're old enough and they have that kind of, and they're kind of like those full sensory experiences. i mean i think they’ve done studies to say that they're not always that accurate but anyways people have encoded them that way, that they're like, you know they'll say if they were warm or they were cold or where they were, you know like if they're stomach was full or if they were hungry, they really, it's one of the few things that is shared that people, they can sort of walk into to it like that. so i started with that. : yeah, the two i was able to think of at first was architecture and events, but i'm sure, yeah i think there's more, those are things i thought of first.  : i mean there's others in other modalities for sure music is huge but like that's not my, but like [person 6] uses that, my musician collaborator, like we did an installation once called [installation 2] and i told her to try to just make it nostalgic and melancholy and she did it in some literal ways like she wound up making a score, she had me type on a manual typewriter because i collect manual typewriters and she got old dictation instruction records and she added stuff from that, she had an old clock radio that like went pt pt pt sound so she had all these extinct analog sounds as part of the sound track to try to trigger people's like sound memories. : so i definitely don’t think that way, like i definitely don’t think in like a linear structured way where i would make a list, it's more like i'm just driving in the car or something or taking a shower or working in the studio and i think "oh that would be interesting to explore more", like i never, yeah that’s all the ideas come that way, so it's more of like i'm sort of worrying around an idea or question or problem or project idea in my head for a few weeks and then it’s like "oh we can do this, i can do this". yeah.  : it's more like, okay so my life is a history of obsessions, that's the other reason that i work in this interdisciplinary way like even when i was a little kid like i would get interested in like a rock band or something and i would go to the library and i would pull all the rolling stones magazines that had articles about them, i mean i did that when i was twelve and so like basically there's no, nothing volitional about it, i just get overtaken by an obsession about something, like when i got interested in memory the first thing i did was i sat down and i actually read the oxford handbook of memory one chapter every day which people tell me later like that’s not really how you read that book and i read [persons 7 & 8] so it's just like okay i need to be, i need to, i want to, it's like food or something, it's like i want to be in the middle of this, i want to be surrounded by this you know and so it's not like i have to do anything, it's like people will say can we talk about something other than nixon and if there's anyone with anything to say about nixon somebody will send them an email and tell them to call me and say you know i met nixon or whatever but like it sort of just takes over for a few years and then something else, it either segways in or sometimes there are periods in between where i don’t have something that i'm focused on, i think it's happened like two or three times in the past like ten or fifteen years, i hate them they're really uncomfortable periods and they can last like four to six months and i'm very uncomfortable and i try to do a lot of things just to get something to catch fire : um hm... sometimes it's structured from the beginning. like i did a series of installations called [installation 3] and it was always going to be six installations so it was kind of a story told across five years and it was like, it was about whether smart building were becoming more like us and it was also like this sort of post 9/11 building. so it was a series of nervous system for buildings that got smarter by incorporating more like off the shelf technologies that kind of mimicked our own neural networks so like it had a visual system from nanny cameras and it had a sense of hearing from baby monitors, as products trickle down off the shelf to, well i arbitrarily decided fifty dollars and availability in big box stores meant things were ubiquitous so if something that had previously been too expensive for me to incorporate into these networks went down to fifty dollars and i could get it at like target and rite aid and circuit city and best buy, they used to have circuit city, then i would incorporate it. so that was always established it was going to be finished at when i did the sixth installation and that was partly determined by external forces like however much technology got down to the fifty dollar big box level was how smart these networks would get, like dvd players went down to forty dollars in the middle of the project so it started to develop a memory and that was the beginning of thinking about memory. so that one i just gave you the world's shortest explanation of a project but sometimes they are like that. like i was like this is what i want to do now, i want to see if i can tell a story in real time in like a sort of symbiotic relationship with consumer technology network that tracks the trickle down of surveillance technology of the consumer level in the post september 11th architecture, you know and that was that and so that was like when 2006 came, i was both anxious and looking forward to not having to work on that anymore, cause like every day for that three years i woke up in the morning and i knew i had to weave these neural cells and look online and see if there were more things that were kind of trickling down and you know and develop these installations and then, after the last one, i didn’t anymore so that was actually really distressing, that was a maybe that was probably one of the hardest times in my life artistically was figuring out what to do after a project that had been that structured like when you finish the study –laughs-.. : so sometimes things just segue into each other. but like the work that ended before that work, sometimes it ends because you go one too far and it's stale and it doesn’t have, it doesn't have an animating um, rationale anymore. sometimes you're lucky like i was lucky that five years of exploring autobiographical memory just effortlessly segued into collective memory and there suddenly were so many things to do again. : so like chimps inventing tools and stuff or... : oh wow yeah. : oh that makes a lot of sense to me yeah. : so i own a building with a friend of mine and she like always goes and paints everyday like she always paints for two hours a day no matter what like she doesn’t have an exhibition or anything and i always have really admired that and sometimes if it’s a little slow i try to do that but i sort of just wander around and don't always know what i'm doing. i think for me, i realized this the other day because i was like working really hard this weekend and i love deadlines and so i think because i was thinking about time and i was thinking like i spend a lot of time on the computer you know on communications and sometimes applying for things or, and i realized in the studio this weekend, that that was generating deadlines and that deadlines were a critical factor in my like being more productive and working more and i was just so happy this weekend that i had a bunch of deadlines. like it was really dumb stuff like um i was making some drawings from images from the [society 1] and i'm going to [city 7] next week and so i suddenly wanted to finish those drawings to show them in st. louis and i got invited to show this work, this project i have called [installation 4] at the museum at [college 6] and i had this one drawing i've been meaning to make but i wasn't under any particular deadline to make it so i hadn't made it all winter and i started that drawing and i was just really happy that i had two upcoming deadlines that were going to make me prioritize going in there and working. and so, i think that i definitely, i think that that's how i work because i can get, i can be too much of a perfectionist and i do think like i used to always tell the students when i used to teach i think that like 90% is showing up and just being there but you have to really be engaged and it's very easy to sort of putter around and to start things and to not have to finish them and the really hard work is resolving things um in either deciding that they suck and throwing them out or getting in a lot of trouble that you don’t know how to get out of because you got into some new territory and then having to invent a solution and like all of these, the easy part is coming up with ideas and the part that you sort of, like the territory that’s mapped and then a lot of people, like i see artists have a lot of unfinished work wandering around their studio and so for me i want to think of something, tell, get it to the point maybe i tell somebody about it, get them to want me to show it and then have to finish it and if it didn’t meet all my expectations, i'll take that idea back and so there's a kind of versioning but i think in between there needs to be an audience and this idea that there's always an audience even if it’s an unconventional audience or a small audience that’s a really important part. like in the studio i think i can set the bar so high that i wouldn't finish anything and it's hard to remember that i think the growth happens in between finished things, not necessarily within a thing and like so, and i when i say i don’t know what they look like when i put them in public, i'm actually sort of talking about the pseudonym which i rely on which is that in the studio it's still the like sort of idealized expression of my will and i'm still trying to aim for that thing which is impossible and i can just spin around and spin around trying to achieve that and then when i put it in the gallery, i have to actually recognize that it's something else than that and usually i can divorce it from failure versus success of the original vision and think about it more in terms of "what is it doing?" and "what is it?" and "what are people seeing?" and "how's it working?" and then that forms the next piece and if i don’t do that whole cycle i just sit around in the idealized place.  : but i really was thinking about it a lot this weekend cause i felt like i was spending too much time sending stuff out and answering requests for information, you know just too much time on the computer in january and then this weekend i had this sort of insight were i was like i was generating deadlines because now i'm being like really productive in the studio again but if i didn't have these deadlines it wasn’t like, i mean they literally caused a kind of focus and i had this energy to work much later at night and not want to go home and like watch netflix, and so they made the work more important and i was more committed to it and then i wanted to see it finished which was missing as a motivation before that like you might want to draw out the pleasurable part of doing the easy part instead, you know. : yeah but it's something i really only just thought of you know, like i knew i used deadlines a lot and i couldn’t defend it you know like i didn't know, and i even thought like "oh well [person 9] is more of like a true artist because she wants to paint everyday and i didn’t necessarily." i wanted to finish things and have people see them –laughs-. : you can talk to me while they're taking blood if you want. : so usually i have like - i thought about this a lot to - usually i have ideally i think like four projects going on at different stages of development, like maybe one needs to finished really soon and one is just starting and one might be in the middle where it feels a little bit bogged down or something but i think that four is a really good number, i think like if i get up to five or six i can get, i feel like i'm a little scattered and if i have less than that i can sort feel bored or something like that, there's like a zone where i'm the right amount stimulated and i think i have that in the studio too like right now i'm working on two sculptures and two drawings and so maybe part of it is like when i get to a place where i'm stuck or bored, instead of leaving, i can go do something that uses very different skills or is in a different phase or like, i like if i have to research something and at the same time i have to go build something different so i guess um that’s sort of my usual process and then every now and then i want to mix it up you know cause that would feel like a job if it was always like that, so i like for example the intensity of like when i went to idaho two weeks ago and i was just like working on this one thing for a whole week and we had to pull really late nights and it was very intense and i didn’t have to be a social person or answer emails or think about any other projects at all you know and then, it's kind of like the feeling sometimes too like when you make a huge mess and then you clean it up, so sometimes i like that feeling too where everything sort of gets out of control and then gets sort of pulled back in so there's this sort of like basic structure of working away on about four things and then, i don’t know why four but...and then u/. : oh well that’s really funny –laughs-. oh that’s interesting, yeah cause three doesn't seem like enough and five sounds stressful. like three is boring, five is stressful, four is perfect. and cause then i feel like really busy and engaged but then every now and then i want to just totally like check out and go on vacation and then when i get back, well actually the week before i leave everything gets amazing and i don’t want to even go, and i've talked to other artists and they all say this, the week before you're going to be forced to not work anymore - even if you're completely bored and low morale and didn't feel like working the week before - suddenly everything starts to be on a roll and you want to cancel the trip because the threat of not being able to work suddenly kicks you into this gear where you're having all this amazing creative energy. and then um, so i like to do that and then, like sometimes even right at the most intense part of a big projects that’s due, i'll go take a long weekend because that seems to amazingly like make you more productive when you get back even though you're stealing three days when you're on a, it breaks that feeling that you're on a schedule somehow and you can work better or more or get further during the same amount of time and then also every now and then i like to just be completely consumed with something even though i might complain about it and i might say that i'm not getting to see people or eat or anything but i like stepping out of the ordinary reality of having all the responsibilities of an adult in our culture and everything and just being like an animal, like you're just one thing, you're just making this thing so that’s kind of - i have a lot of freedom because i'm self-employed and so sometimes my schedule, i don’t control it because things are just happening and i have to do them but that’s sort of the ideal so maybe the vacation once a year, the immersive thing twice and otherwise working along on four things. : yeah yeah. that’s something we talked about a lot this summer at [location 2] cause we noticed the writers, they were really productive in the morning and they would get up and they would often get up really early and they would write a lot and then maybe they would like go do exercise or ride a bike or something in the afternoon and so the other sculptors and i, we were talking about, we had sort of the opposite, we felt like we woke up in the morning and i would say the executive part but they didn't really talk like that, they just said you know they were too busy with all their anxieties and all their problems of life or, like a lot of times they would want to do it the other way around, either do things on the computer or go exercise first or whatever cause you basically, we sort of talked like about wanting to tire your brain down or quiet it down to the point where you could even be still long enough to think about formal things in a sculpture and so i've definitely noticed that. like i don't think i could - there's been times where i've had to get up and go to the studio first thing in the morning and i'd just, i'm all over the place and so i think i use getting more mentally tired as a disinhibitor in a way because then i can actually slow down and focus. like i'm a really hyperactive verbal person and so i sort of need to burn off a lot of that energy sometimes before i can go be still and be quiet by myself and be and more introspective. so that i've definitely like anecdotally noticed. i'm trying to think what else i've noticed. cause it's not things i have a theory about its more things i just sort notice of over time. um, i mean, yeah, i think that i and many other artists i know definitely, like it's fun, i only have ever done this at artist colonies cause i always have to drive home in [city 3] and i would never bring a bottle of wine to the studio but at artists colonies sometimes like you'll go back to work after dinner and drink a glass of wine and work on something that’s not terribly important and that can be great and i don’t think that it’s any coincidence that lots of painters, you know there's a reputation for them drinking or whatever because to do something that just puts you in a different sort of state of mind again like i always think of it as, i mean it's oversimplifying to say like left brain you know but, that sort of quiets the practical logical side and lets you be more present.  : yeah so i think i use deadlines for that you know i definitely like to have structures that i play off of so i think even, and that’s probably, like all my systems and all my rules are partly, because i would never be very happy as like an abstract expressionist painter, i would have no idea what to do. i would not know when something was finished and actually there's a story they tell about, you know the painter [person 10]? : he does these big sort of photorealistic faces, he's from like the 70s, he's done portraits of the presidents and he actually went to undergraduate school where i went to grad school at [college 7]. so his professors used to tell the story that he was an abstract expressionist painter, they all were, it was the 50s, that’s all you could be, that’s what you were if you were a painter, and he kind of hated it cause he could never figure out when a painting was finished, um and so he made a list of everything that he stood for which is like action, gesture, color, brush strokes, movement, dynamism, and then he made a list of everything that would be the opposite and it was like photograph, portrait, the grid, control, tightness, illustration, and he decided to try to make the opposite thing, and it turned out that was like the most satisfying thing he ever done and he loved, cause he would grid them out and like take someone's driver' s license and like make a really fine grid and then blow that up and he loved getting up in the morning and thinking 'if i work for eight hours today, i will finish three quarters of the ear, you know, and like his whole reputation was made on of this exercise, i don't know if it’s apocryphal, but that's a story they always told about him and so i think for me like the worst possible situation, like i had an engineer who used to call problems 'under constrained' like we wouldn't know where to start if we didn't know how many square feet and the budget and when it was due and how long it had to last and so that to me is horrible, that’s not freedom, that’s awful and so i think i probably do the thing you're talking about all the time and when i make up these like theoretical structures of what the project is about and i say you know this is how i'm allowed to proceed and these are sort of the rules and then as i feel comfortable, i let some of them go but i think i've tried to, so on one hand i actively seek inhibition of all the irrelevant thoughts, but i also try to constrain the problem enough so that i can experiment a lot within this kind of confined space so that it's not like anything goes cause that is so, i don't know that’s so terrifying to me, that’s like, yeah. : a lot, a lot. well because i think i'm like counter-suggestable though, like i've always have been like that like i'm much more excited if there's something to push off against or you know when i think there's an adolescent part of me that likes there to be some kind of authority that i can like/  : a little bit, i've heard about it. : who are more disagreeable? who are more contrary. yeah : yeah no i think so, because also so i was thinking about it like. i always talk about interdisciplinary of why i became an artist and that is like intellectually the reason but in terms of personality type ,i really, really hated being an assistant professor, i left before tenure, like i've never, i mean i think i am able to function as like a credible responsible adult person but not in a hierarchical power structure ever like and almost all the fields that i at least fantasied that i could have excelled in would have required this kind of submission to authority as part of the advancing and i, that's why i think i just imagine, i think i had the ability but not the aptitude to do any of those things and so i probably play with that a little in my own work too you know of making rules and breaking them like. cause i do find it creative but obviously like you know in like vocationally or something it's distressing in your own world when you make the rules it can be really fun. but i think that deliberate, you know, goal-oriented achievements aside that is also part, like because in art you know there's a very enormous tolerance for nonconforming at least outside of academia and i actually can be the, i can be cast against type by being this square in art. : wow, that’s a mouthful. : cool. i have some questions for you later. : hmm, that’s kind of a loaded question.  probably the best thing, the best way i can answer that is the thing that i haven't done yet.  the thing that fascinates me the most is tomorrows piece.  and i'd like to think i'm the most proud of it, but its always up for judgement.  but, i'm driven by creating new images and new forms of engagement with other people.  making the work is a high.  it’s a tangible high.  its adrenaline filled.  it takes me hours to come down from a working session.  but, the work is not complete until it sees the light of day, until it gets viewed.  i work on paper primarily, indian ink on paper.  and, so, a hundred pieces can be stacked that big.  so, i'm very fortunate, i don’t create white elephants that i need huge amount of storage space for.  however, in that portfolio that might contain twenty five pieces and is zipped up and is lying there, i always see that as the tell tale heart, you know its, bump bump, bump bump.  its sheer potentiality.  is it art if its not seen?  if it doesn’t hit the light of day?  if its in a storage cabinet?  if its in a portfolio?  its potentiality, its art, i made it.  i made it either last week or ten year ago, but it becomes really art when its seen, when its talked about, when i draw people in.  certainly when it gets bought and gets displayed in somebody's home, then it has a life of its own, that i can't control anymore, which is fabulous.  i have no problem with that.  buy all you want, ill make more.  but the work that i'm the most proud of is the work that hasn't been done yet.  if you wanted an answer that was more concrete about the thrity years that i've been practicing, the work that has a public capabi - a public aspect to it.  i love bringing my work in a public forum where art engages with people who don’t expect it.  i've been fortunate enough to be commissioned and to have done pieces of public art that people see and encounter that are well placed and well designed, that don’t force themselves on you as a pedestrian, but that - increase the beauty of the experience of an everyday sort of thing.  the three major ones in my career is a ten by fifteen foot mural at the [airport 1], a ten foot tall by two hundred and fifty five foot mural at the [performing arts center 1], which was commissioned in 1993 and i just this november was commissioned to restore it to its original, maybe even better glory, and then in 2007 i did twelve glass windscreen panels for an above ground subway station in the [place 1] which was a commission from the [organization 1] and every year they renovate four to six stations and every year they have competitions and do commissions for the placement of art in these renovated stations.  a lot of the artwork underground takes the form of mosaics or laser cut tiles.  some design projects where gates become part of an artistic piece and they've been doing this for twenty four, twenty five years now.  i knew that i wanted to have one of these and i applied and applied and applied and on my eighth time, seven rejections, on my eighth time i was chosen to be one of three finalists, then i won it.  it’s a beautiful piece and its above ground about six stops north of [landmark] on [street name] on the number four train. : there you go, [university 1].  it’s a beautiful piece, i'm insanely proud of that.  the red thread of those pieces is that they are all publicly accessible and exist in the public realm that has, you know, artistic context to it.  but, there's an unexpected sense of encountering art in the unexpected place.  i think that’s really beautiful, i think that’s really special.   : every time that i've gone up to [street name], i hang out and i talk to people who are commuters and who use the station.  and then i introduce myself and say i did those.  he's like, "no way you did that, i love that!  i've seen a lot of bad art in the subway system, but i'm proud of ours".  you know, "ours".  they take ownership of it because its their station.  when you are a commuter and when you don’t use the cars - we do here in [city 1], a station becomes, there's an ownership that’s "my station".  where do you get off when i come to you.  where do you get off at the market stop.  oh, that’s my stop.  so, there's ownership and then all of a sudden there's a public ownership of your work that goes above and beyond the commissioning process.  and that its permanently installed, you know its not a temporary site, its not something where, oh this will be up for six months, don’t you feel special?  no, not really, you know, and permanent. : um, my current engagement with imagery, um, is engaging the viewers mind and eye with mystery where the apparent concreteness of the imagery is not immediately identifiable.  but that the patternation that the allover surface is really beautiful.  to get that engagement without definition, and then give definition, but not raw but of the beauty of the mystery.  so that you can lose the image again once you know it.  that delicate balance is what i'm working with right now.  so, for my most recent show in november in a gallery in [city 2], one of the best pieces i did, and ill give you - i mean if you’ve been on my website you might have encountered this already, but i did a piece just of these little - they looked like check marks, and its - they're odd.  when your up close – and the piece if forty by sixty – and it becomes very abstract and there are a hundred and forty four of these little check marks and they're in white, everything else is black.  and only when you step away from it do you recognize the image and it sort of gels, it sort of clicks. when you see it in small, its like seeing something in a thumbnail, you're more likely to recognize it when its small than when its big because of the scale issue.  but the scale relationship of the corporeal scale to the work is actually more relevant in its large scale.  so its not up on that.  that’s interesting, yeah, dial in [gallery 1]. : it’s a little bit like [artist 1] but [artist 1] is working with ideas of what would become pixels, you know, no this is more of an abstraction.  i can actually show you one other thing.  artists.  um, second row, last image.   : but when you see it in forty/sixty its incredibly difficult to comprehend.  so, if you wanna...: its masochistic. india ink is a beautiful medium, i mean. i've reduced a lot of my production down to india ink because it is a medium that may be best serves my imagistic curiosity and that is placed in light and shadow and reflection.  and how best to represent light is by the absence of light, silhouette, shadows, and how do you create something that is truly just piercingly sharp... well that india ink is just wonderful, it is pure black, it doesn’t fade.  and, technically, i put it in a double boiler and i reduce it by about twenty percent, sort of like a good rue, like a good sauce, so that it sinks into the paper but it also sets up on the paper, so it has a little bit of sculpturality, if you will, on a millimeter/nanometer basis.  so those and take a look if you want of those.  i just unpacked those.  i brought those along because i thought they would be... its my most recent investigation.  and there's some people who get it immediately and some people who don’t, and that fine, its not about... i had one person who just this morning have a fascinating interpretation of them that was dead on, but it was not necessarily - i mean i'm not one who believes that there's one answer or one way to see something.  i think those people – those artists who want to say only one thing are really limiting themselves.  if you bring to this something from your experience, i welcome it.  there's no wrong or right, and i certainly say that when i approach kids about art. : marble is beautiful, i like that. marble is great.  : yeah, yeah.   : packed is a perfect word.  you'll really love it when i tell you what they are because the word packed is integral.  so this is just the tip of the iceberg as far as imagistic development is concerned.  i've been thinking about these... : oh, very nice, i like that too.  i've been playing with it for close to two years trying to work it out and this is the first time i've actually manifested it as a drawing and i've done them over the last two weeks, and they're pen, so they're not paints, they're actually mechanical pen.  i'm going to scale them up and change and do things.  so, do you want to know where they come from?   : i talk about macro, micro, you know.  marlin in a fish bowl.   : bubble wrap. : the thing about these four is that its actual scale.  and so much like working with the macro micro, what happens to images like this when they go large.  do they become more abstract or do they actually become more recognizable?  and this is something youhave to do to find out, but you're the only third and fourth person to see these.  but i thought as an introduction to my thinking methodology, i thought i would bring these today. : they're really fun.  the possibilities of execution are frickin' endless.  i mean, what happens if i take that composition, square, and blow it up to eighteen by eighteen.   : well, yeah.  i'm not saying i wont rule it out.  or, what if i do a forty by sixty, in actual size.  how many circles would that be because it comes in a roll, right, and... : no, the whole point of it would be that it would be not all.... : and each one would have a different reflectivity, so, that’s kind of fun, isn't it?  this is kind of what i do.  and when you said, what am i most proud of, my next pieces... : to the bubble wrap or to the technique? : is there an epiphany that brought me here? : i probably develop my imagery and my fascination through two forces.  one is process and technical.  i really love the process of making art and how to make decisions and figure out problems.  in many ways present problems to myself to then figure out.  so how do i make something look three dimensional on a two dimensional plane?  well the answer to that came about very early in my career, is that i use photography.  i love photography.  photography is a tool for me to translate the three dimensional into the two dimensional, from which i then can manipulate.  i can then change and add and subtract and recombine, but its fixed.  the word fix is, you know part of photography is history.  you put something in a fixer so it wont be ephemeral anymore.  so i love the process, i love tinkering, and i started this tinkering way back when, prior to digital manipulation.  so, its all organic to this day.  its still very, very organic.  i use digital camera, i use scanners, and i use the internet help broadcast my work, but the actual making of the piece is still unbelievably rooted in an analog world and an analog based process world.  that’s process development.  emotional development is thinking about metaphor.  thinking about metaphor a conduit to reach people.  and, that can be conscious and unconscious on the point of the viewer.  i don’t require somebody to understand the amount of the emotional investment i put into my work.  however, if they care to dig deeper, there's a lot of it there, and i fill my work with a lot of heart, a lot of soul, a lot of thinking.  you might call it an intellectual engagement, but it doesn’t have to be intellectual, it can be emotional.  you know, the chain link fence.it s a very beautiful representation of a chain link fence, but what does that image signify?  it signifies division.  division between us and them, or here and there, or keep out.  those are emotionally in there, even for somebody not willing to narratively work out an image.  but i invest almost everything i do with a level of narrative engagement.  whether it’s the silhouettes and the urban imagery of the silhouettes and the shadows.  pedestrians and urban environment.  you never see faces in those pieces, its all about body language.  its about gate.  its about rhythm.  its about form over feature.  so when we're walking down the hallway, we will notice people's features, but we wont notice people's forms.  if i take those features away, yeah there's a lot to be learned and a lot to be ascertained about character and position, just through the form we carry through the world slope.  the body, the balls forward, cocky, or the down-trodden.  the less fortunate.  so those are those two paths and that’s just developed very organically as i've gone on with my career,.  i mean i started very instinctually, just like i wanna make something.  now, i have a greater sense of responsibility about making images and it takes longer, but that might be because i'm a father and dealing with a seven year old.  but, id like to think i'm, i see more responsibility as an image maker.  did that answer your question or did that veer off?  you can come back and push me in a better direction. : pivotal event to me being an artist or making imagery? : really, really, great people.  meeting artists was pivotal.  i loved art before i ever met an artist.  i was a... very early on, i was sort of a latched key kid before the term got coined.  i went home and went into an empty apartment. : in [city 3], um, and this was commonplace.  i mean this was nothing special.  my mom worked.  she'd come home at six-thirty, seven o'clock.  i had dinner on the table, i cooked... very strict.  but to augment this three hours you know that i would have to myself, she bought me a membership at the [museum 1], at the [museum 2], at the {museum 3], we were living in the [part of town], so each of these were within ten blocks walking from my school and my home.  and so, i owned these places, i could just walk in, show them my membership card, spend a half an hour or twenty minutes, so i was unbelievably fortunate to have a sort of casual relationship with art.  it didn’t have to be a trip to the museum, you know, if i needed to pee id go to the [museum 2] because they had a really nice bathroom, and yeah you'd see a [artist 2] on the way out.  that was wonderfully formative.  but meeting artists, um like [artist 3] who was my professor in [city 4] and then later meeting [artist 4] and [artist 5] were the two ones i adored and had the best relationship with.  it was just the noble profession, it was just seemed like such a remarkably natural thing to be if you wanted to do that, it seemed to be that i could do that.  i didn’t see barriers to doing that which is extraordinary because art just seems like a barrier filled - how do you go about it, you know.  i never enterned an mfa program after my bachelor's.  i got my bachelor's degree in film, not in art.  i graduated with enough credits in art to get a dual major but they wouldn’t allow it because art was in the college of art, letters, and sciences and film was in the school of speech, communications at that time.  i had accrued in four years enough credits for both but they said, nah uh uh.  they had the balls to say, oh if you pay one more year of tuition, i'll give you two.  and i was like are you freaking kidding me.  so, i took the film degree and left and thought, ok, the film degree might open some doors if i got in that direction, but if i go in the art direction my art is going to open the doors.  so, meeting artists.  it was just wonderful.  by being an artist in residence for the grade school, i loved these kids to meet an artist.  their parent are cpa's, they're doctors, they're lawyers, you know, um they're professionals.  when would they have an opportunity to meet an artist and have an artist be apparent but also a regular joe, like nothing special.  ya, i think what we do is special, but i like it when it is lawyer, doctor, artist, its on the same plateau, that makes me very proud, so meeting artists was incredibly important.   : absolutely, yeah.   : i do, i see students who don't have the pressures of choosing what they're going to be.  i have lectured to colleges and mfa programs and things like that.  what i'm enjoying most about teaching first to sixth graders is that art can be a fun tool with which to appreciate the world.  and that it just gives me a heightened sense of pleasure to see the world through other means, through other ways.  and for this to be incorporated in a very natural way that, i mean one of the things that i have said on a couple of occasions, especially to the fourth through sixth graders who are more attuned to it, i say, you know, to see the world a little bit differently, that capability, that skill set is applicable when you're a cpa, when you're a doctor, when you're a mergers and acquisitions, um you know, lawyer.  and, it can be the lineation between being a good lawyer and a great lawyer.  it can be the difference between being a rote doctor and a noble prize winner.  these are important aspects that you can bring to the act of creativity and you can learn creativity, you can nurture creativity.  i believe you can.   : how?  um, through fun and exercise.  i mean i did one sort of exercise of dividing a cube into halves into quarters, and into eighths, and how many combinations you can create by that.  and i gave them the exercises.  i gave them a black square, which was four by four inches.  and then i gave them white squares which were two by two inches, which is a quarter of that four by four.  and i said, you can take one white, two whites, or three whites, place them anyway you want, and then turn the paper over, put your name on it, adhere them with a glues tick, and then give me an arrow in which the piece is to be shown, because if the white is here, it can be shown here, here, and here, so alignment.  and then every class except two i got one to three people who gave me a square like that, not like that.  the assumption was that it was boom, it had to be... but they packed it forty-five degrees.  and i put the instructions on the board and on a power point and the instructions did not include the presentation.  so, yeah, that’s thinking outside of the box, that’s saying what isn't said could be a way to be creative, could be a way to show my self as different.  and some had beautiful symmetry, some had cockeyed like this form was moving, some had two boxes that impinged on each other, and some had just a checkerboard, right, because if you do two, black white, white black, perfect and clean.  cleanliness, order, right?  and each of these, when you put them together, is a representative of the myriad classroom, the weaving of different personalities, i love it.  so what i'm doing with all of these things is i'm making a quilt because a quilt is a basic four square pattern, so i'm putting them together in a way that represents the entire school.   : do boarders and the center is going to be all the things and then everything else is going to be around. : yes, exactly.  and then, i'm very proud of this, my son, who saw the power point presentation at home and started to think about it, he put eight arrows on the back.  what's that about? : hes my kid, but you can do it this way, this way, this way, and this way... i don’t care.  to be able to, right, i mean he did something that was the same four directions, but he said, show it any way you want.  but he knew how to communicate that by putting eight arrows.  and i was like, "that’s my boy."  even though i whisper in his ear, "hedge-fund manager, hedge-fund manager."  and, you know, in a desperate attempt of parental, please... just have a good life.  but, i'm having a very good life, i have no regrets.  but my mother was unbelievably concerned. : oh yeah.  for my 16th birthday, she gave me a book and i have it to this day and it said, "your career in business".  get with it [pt name]. and it was written by [business man 1], who was the founder of [company 1]. but [business man 1]'s son became the director of the [museum 2], so there it lies a wonderful irony that mr. business man gave birth to mr. artist.  and so, yeah.  : yeah. : heck, yeah.  absolutely.  but he was the business man, i mean.  but, again, there's creativity in business, there's creativity in entrepreneurship.  i bring my creativity to bear unhitching unpitchings and making people see the value of art.  but none of that is taught in mfa programs. there's a serious lack, and i don’t know how it is in medicine, but is... i mean it’s the ivory tower concept of things.  i mean you talk about hispanics, you talk about composition and so fourth and so on.  no one ever teaches you how to get a gallery or how to show your work or how to price your work or how to catalog your work.  how to be a professional.  and there in lies the problem because there are so many artists out there who are idiots when it... i mean they shoot themselves in the foot constantly because they have absolutely no business acumen.  negative business acumen is really what its at.  um, and that’s unfortunate.  but i hear a tell that lawyers aren't taught about opening firms and doctors aren't taught about incorporating.  so its always like, yeah, go out there.  sink or swim.   : completely.  i mean, applicable in different ways to different people, but there are, yes, codifiable... what a good word. : no, not for me. : completely, yeah.  my father was an engineer.  he worked in mechanical aerospace and biomedical.  he had over a hundred personal patents to his name.  so creativity was burning in him.  he also painted.  so he, you know, go off at ten in the evening and whip out a painting and finished at four in the morning and presented to my mom in the morning.  so, he was really capable as a painter.  ill show you a couple of pieces of his, but not in any way serious as far as using that talent in art.  but a lover of art and a consumer of art.  but his modus operandi as best as i can tell was that he would present himself to programs and companies and say, "give me your worst problem.  your unattainable problem.  i'll fix it."  and really describes it, "let me see if i can take a crack at solving it."  and that’s how he invented things.  so he worked for [government agency 1], he worked for [company 2], he worked for aerospace engineering here in [place 2].  and he had really, really bizarre patents.  in 1929 i think he patented a tray that would hook onto a car, which became kind of the drive in.  and he had an automatic turn off valve for motorcycles when they fell down because motorcycles at that time were even more dangerous than they are innately was that when they fell over that they would continue to spin and hit and so he worked a system by which it would, like with a ball and water.  that was him.  and then biomedical engineering, the last 8 years of his life, he was very instrumental in catheters.  catheter pilot guide systems where a catheter would be inserted here and the tip could be guided left or right or, it’s the molar pilot guide system to this day and his stuff is used in conjunction with sonar now, but it used to be with x-ray.  so yeah, there's a lot of creativity there.  but, very sadly he died when i was seven and a half.  but i fully believe he infected me with a sense of wonder and creativity and investigation, visual investigation.  very little of which i remember.  : its got to be there.  absolutely.  and that’s where i'm, your know proud as punch when i look at [name 1] and i go, there's the lineage.  [name 1] senior, my father, [name 1], my son. : alright.: do you have water? : that would be really nice, i looked at that and was like, that’s not mine.... : well i mean... its that nice chestnut of ten percent inspiration ninety percent perspiration.  you can think about a piece all you want until you make it real, its not a piece.  i mean it can be really real in my mind, i mean i've said on several occasions that for every piece i actually make, there's at least ten maybe twelve pieces in my mind that i haven't made.  that’s the standard ratio and it has been like that forever.  those limitations are solely based on time, money, need of sleep.  i'd make more if i could.  i'd always make more if i could.  i'm copasetic with the limitations that this life, this vessel affords me.  i'm very, i'm fine with that.  i'm not angry or waving my fist at some deity.  but there's always undone pieces.  the trouble that some people i think get into is telling people about a good idea.  a good idea will generate pats on the back that are satisfactory, that make you feel good.  and for every pat on the back that you get, you're probably twenty percent less likely to make the piece because you've already received the accolade, the pavlovian response of reward.  so, for about eighteen to twenty months, ive been ruminating and thinking and playing with the possibilities of bubble wrap.  i never told anybody about the idea until i made it so that i could show its physical.  and i'm leary of showing that too many times because it might actually take the wind out of my sails doing the twenty by twenty piece or the forty by sixty piece.  large, same scale, all of the variations that are percolating in my brain.  so, yes.  the work is everything.  the more that i work, the more that i want to work.  it’s a very, very happy addictive process.  i totally love it.   : the first thing that i think of there is my pleasure in working serially.  i love latching onto something and doing variations on a theme.  the low hanging fruit might be numbers one to six in a series but without doing six, the breakthrough or the alteration of perspective or the "aha moment" might not be able to be achieved if i had not done one through six and sometimes its one through twelve and its number eighteen that something changes.  but the discipline to do eighteen variations with one particular set of restrictions or paradigms or definitions is incredible.  its so much fun.  and that’s not to say that if something happens at number nineteen, that’s not to say that one through eighteen are throw-outable.  they serve a purpose and more often than not they're good, but they give birth to something else, so the seriality and the discipline.  i like the idea of inhibitions working for you rather than against you.  i'm completely on that.  but then i would also point to a long history of creativity where people have... fight the inhibitions as demons and um the long terrible and tragic history of alcoholism with creative people seems to me to be impart trying to drive out inhibitions.  trying to act as a conduit of your work, like [poet 1], you know., and his awful drinking.  but the had fear, and how would he deal with the fear?  he would drink.  its an incredibly long history of alcoholism and creative people.  and i know some... a very good friend of mine whose a poet described it this way; that his creativity is about heightened sensitivity.  it can be emotional, it can be too light.  and part of drinking was the damping down of that sensitivity.  was literally the filtering that allowed him to exist because everything was so loud, so bright, so beautiful that you cant function and functioning was reducing those capabilities through alcohol or through drugs or whatever to a point to where you could function on a level that they expected of themselves.  i mean [artist 6] i think had this capability of being able to tap the intuitive and as soon as he was thinking too much, he felt that there was an editor rather than an author, so he drank to access the escape from the editor.  i'm unbelievably fortunate that alcoholism is not in my family and that hasn’t come into play.  but i've seen it.  i've seen it a lot.  have you seen [author 1]'s ted talk on genius and creativity? : let me make sure to send you the link of that.  its one of the most entertaining and lovely; she's the woman who wrote [book 1] and i'm not a big fan of her writing or her feel goody pop psychology, but her presentation is absolutely wonderful.   : i think you'd enjoy it.  and then there's another article in a recent new yorker about a woman with amnesia who was an illustrator... i'll bring that to you.  very interesting.  i mean severe amnesia. : wow. : of memory. : i have been described as a bit of a savant visually because i remember artwork not only who its by but how it was made and where i first saw it and what gallery i first saw it.  its like this strange little rolodex that i can go through and call something up.  and so when i see a [artist 7] sculpture at [gallery 2] here in [city 1], i will recall all of the other [artist 7]s that i have seen.  and what's really fun is when i talk about art and i start linking these synaptic leaps together for people, so in that i see a real roll of memory, but it’s a memory of experience with art and my trajectory of understanding work and emotionally connecting with work.  i have a series um, i don’t know if you have checked this out also, but for the last five years i have run a blog called [title 1].  and in it i discuss, i discuss a couple of things, but one of the reoccurring things i do with the blog is called "art imitates life"… no "life imitates art".  and that s when i become so familiar with art that’s when i see about what the art is based on, the life reminds me of the art rather than the other way around.  so my memory and my experience and my investment visually is with the interpretation of life.  so that becomes the primary and life becomes the secondary.  so when i see a [artist 5] landscape of [city 5], that becomes the source material.  when i go to [city 5], the landscapes remind me of a [artist 5] rather than the other way around.  and my happiest moment of that is [artist 8], whose a fantastic painter whose been around for fifty years.  bit of an iconoclastic, portraits, hand painted portraits of people in the midst of minimalism and pop art and the 1960s and 70's.  now he's seen as a great grand master but no one could really understand what the hell he was doing.  but, he has painted his wife for fifty years, [wife of artist 8].  and if you're invested in his career and you see the trajectory of his work, you start recognizing her and its always [wife of artist 8] in the title and [wife of artist 8] grows older and as he has aged, and it’s the most extraordinary love affair to be witnessed over fifty years.  and i describe sitting in a bistro in [place 3] and the door open and in walks [wife of artist 8] and i recognize her immediately from the paintings and she's alive, she's there, then [artist 8] walks in after... and i recognized her.  so that’s a memory thing definitely.  as far as my experiences with my artwork, i find actually that i lose memory, that i sometimes have to reinvent the wheel because i didn’t get it or i may have understood something five years ago that i have to fight for again, that i don’t necessarily... i think my image building is one of more... greater and greater sophistication.  i don't think technically sometimes, i just have to reinvent the wheel, and that just might be part of the pleasure because if... i mean like [filmmaker 1] believed that the film was made when it was storyboarded.  that the actual filming was rote, that anyone could do it.  it was completely like divorced during the process of the filmmaking.  all of the creativity was storyboarded.  i could never get to a point, i think it would be sad, i think somehow it would be immensely tragic if i somehow got to the point to where the making of the work wasn’t enjoyable.  and maybe forgetting how to do something and then remembering or recreating that sense of epiphany is a way to dilute myself into that reoccurring pleasure.   : yeah, right.  but i get constant discovery walking around, you know i mean its like ooo, ahh. : yeah, i mean, its hard to turn off.  its damn near impossible sometimes, but i mean when you talk about, you know, existing, i'm very pleased, don’t get me wrong that you say lucky man and more often than not, i'm very proud of it.  but, functioning, on a sort of go-go level or financially and... um if you're constantly experiencing little acts of reverie and shadows with the experiences with your son and it takes you an hour to get over how proud you are or how mystified you are with the whole process.  to be able to write an email to a potential client, um you're working... i cant help but thinking that you're working at a disadvantage.  so i'm lucky i'm advantaged and then you're disadvantaged because you're dealing with it all the time.   : no. : yeah. : oh, yeah, absolutely.   : nice, nice.  well, i mean when i was talking about this with my wife i said, well i'm sure he knows the [filmmaker 2] joke of "we need the eggs". : well i think its at the end of [movie 1], he goes, you know the old story about the man goes to a psychiatrist and says, "doc, um my brother's having a very, very hard time with it and its really affecting our entire family.  my brother thinks he's a chicken." and the doctor says, "amazingly i just read this report.  we can do something about this.  we can cure him." and the guy says, "well, we really don’t want to cure him.  we need the eggs." and yeah, we need the eggs.  i think creatives have learned to take the bad with the good, to mitigate the bad and to captivate the good.  but there is a bad to it.  you know, and i think as i mentioned before i think alcoholism is a side of those people who cant mitigate the bad or don't know how.  and, i mean fortunately i think the world in which my son is being raised is a great deal more tolerant maybe is the word, responsive, encouraging of people looking at things a different way.  i was not rewarded for that.  academically, no.  emotionally, no.  you know, so i mean, certainly socially.  as a kid i would cut sports to go to the art room.  well, i was a fag.   : i mean this was the 70's. : that was an insult, yeah.  so, i'm very, very happy the world we live in today, but its still, i mean, i wouldn’t categorize it as a burden but i think it is to some people.  i think, you know, we need the eggs.  i make a good omelet.   : cool : -laughs- : (inaudible) : right : okay : hm... in my career as a visual artist? : ummm : well i think, umm... i feel a big accomplishment for me in the visual arts is having balance.  you know, a career as a visual artist and a uh... demanding other career as an attorney and so i think you know my path as a visual artist has been a lot like of trying to figure out the relationship between those two very different kinds of lives and overlaps and the sort of connections between them and so i think what i am proud of about is attained a level of achievement in both fields in a way... i don’t know how sustainable it is because i do think at a certain level of a career as a visual artist and as a lawyer you know, the demands start to become... um start to require much um much more involvement just mentally and physically, you know. so that’s something i’m kind of trying to figure out now, what point do i sort of, do i need to take a leap you know and sort of make a choice. so that’s been i think uh... that’s that's... how i think about achievement in terms um of being a visual artist too, its just how its been balanced against the other parts of my life that are also important to me and also create the conditions that allow me to be an artist too. i mean i think um... there was a period of time where i i just tried to make a living off of visual arts and it was probably about a year that i attempted to do that you know in like 2001 and the kind of pressures that came with that you know, just economically, trying to make a living off of it, i think interfered at that time with my certain development as an artist and so it was necessary for me to sort of, kind of um... um... split the baby in a way uh... and- but i think that was the right choice- and i have this ability to sort of toggle between these worlds too and so i think that’s what’s allowed me to progress. but in terms of visual arts, i think that one of the... uh you know i'm... i feel that getting a uh major visual artist grant was a big achievement for me.  it helped me feel validated as a visual artist. having gotten reviewed in a couple different publications was also really important for me um... in terms of outside validation, in terms of my own internal sort of sense of achievement having completed a body of work, i think that… you know most... i don’t know its weird cuz i know a lot of people say that the most important uh...the most important uh... work that you’ve done is the one that’s coming up you know. but looking back i think that a really formative project for me uh... was this project i did, this visceral realist project where i sort of imagined the exhibition construct as a- as a... literary format you know where... and i spent three years constructing a um fictional... art movement um... producing all the work of these fictional artists and also critical reviews of their work and uh... creating uh... a pretty expansive archive of their sort of documentation of all their work um... and uh... it was a real um entire cosmology of you know uh characters, just like you would have in a book. you know i was seeking that kind of freedom of a uh... writer in the visual arts setting so um... so there were like third party non profit organizations that i set up/ : /you know to archive and proliferate their work./ : /and uh... yeah so i felt like when i completed that project, it really felt like a really massive, big achievement and –takes a breath- its probably for me still i think i’m from that creative period and making work now. i’ve sort of changed my relationship from-with those fictional artists from being the curator and historian at that time to now being an artist who’s really influenced by their work um... and um... yeah so i feel like that probably is is, as far as my own, my work as a visual artist you know that was probably the most formative.  : yeah : its very flexible : yeah it was sort of-  i read before that really it’s um... it's in the obstacles or the problems that you encounter is really you know where the creative opportunity lies. so feeling boxed in at a certain period of time uh with what is sort of what you’re supposed to do um- not having an mfa i think uh... kind of made me a little disagreeable with the general art world. -laughs- and wanting to sort of you know construct a world that both uh... generated work but also was my own audience and also validated itself you know. um i think that was the way i tried to resolve that challenge, or problem, or that chip on my shoulder, kind of led to me seeking the maximum amount of flexibility and the maximum amount of plasticity in terms of my position in it all so. : well i think you know we all construct our own worlds. i think the question of fiction is uh... you know i think front and center now in just our sense of reality you know everything is so constructed and fabricated and... uh we have- you know a kind of self-validating uh... information uh systems now where um... as much information is out there we really- so many people are seeking out those views and that information that simply validates what you’re essentially feeling and so- you have a, i think uh... a deeply segmented society as a result of that that’s increasingly that's increasingly segmented i think. because your ability to kind of create your own reality and so i think that the work speaks to that. i think it’s problematized by that because, you know in some ways is this construct a, a cynical one that i’ve created in that you know there is no truth and it’s just whatever we make of it. you know, completely relative... system or is it... um i’d like to think of it less cynical and more about freedom you know and our ability to imagine uh the political possibilities uh... without having to be you know restricted by questions of practicality or or um, i guess limits. um... so um yeah and i think... yeah so that that’s, does that answer your question? :  yeah i mean i -it’s interesting, i mean this study to me it’s particularly interesting because i, because i've always, i’ve been thinking a lot for years about the relationship between these different worlds and these different ways of thinking you know um. i mean there’s kind of a conventional wisdom kind of um... about this sort of left brain right brain kind of, ideas about you know art is all about feelings and subjectivity and um... it's very tied to this kind of romantic notions of, of artists from,  you know, kind of modernists kind of way of thinking about artists and i -that law is this sort of objective uh machine like process like a  black box where you put in the facts and the truth and justice will come out on the other end. in my experience with both worlds is that, that's i really far from the truth. i mean i think that art as... art today is so much more about the um... conference room and uh research and kind of a- um... theoretical rigor you know i think is important to um. critical thinking faculties are very important to the practice of art today. um at least the art that i’m interested in. and you know, i think that i find that ability to sort of make arguments either in... the language that’s you use to talk about your work or even arguments you can sort of think about the arguments that you make and form an image as being arguments as well.  um that that actually i think serves my artistic practice pretty well and i think that in law as i continue to work um... it just feels more and more like totally you know subjective. you know like these trials that i do are like morality plays and the judges are really, have an initial um... intuitive reaction to what’s happening and uh... doing these sort of ex post facto kind of like ways to justify that initial impulse. so there’s um... there's much less i think uh... uh specialization in the disciplines in reality. i think there's, they both benefit from a certain illusion that’s put out there but um... so i’ve thought a lot about you know the different types of cognitive functions that go into making work and uh... and um being a good lawyer and i think law has a lot to do with parsing out and separating out the sort of elements of concepts and ordering, there’s a lot of ordering, sequencing that happens. um art it feels much more like you’re trying to draw- find the intersections, the connections between things um and uh to take things that are dissimilar and finding their sort of uh common threads or metaphorical qualities i guess you know. i think in some types of legal work there is uh room for that kind of you know that finding of intersections, i think am particularly good at cross examinations in trials and i think part of that has to do with having a more developed, kind of creative um cognitive function. um you know i can find things that a witness might say at some other point in the entire, in the hearing and, and maybe i’ll connect it with something else that’s being said later on and draw them together as a point of contrast or impeachment.  so i’m, i'm thinking about all of this stuff quite a bit so it’s interesting to me going through the process and doing these exercises and things like that so. : no i haven't seen that  : mhm : right : yeah : yeah well it's not just the deconstruction, i think there's also like uh uh uh there is a need to sort of draw boundaries and draw distinctions you know. and separate out um...  so i-you know.. i think now it's just become really integrated and both side because i mean the construction of the fiction of the visceral realists i mean that required kind of like just a sense of stepping outside yourself and being able to think about what looks credible and what constitutes evidence that these artists exist and what kind of surfaces and what kind of vehicles of meaning do you have to um utilize in order to project their existence you know, with a view or with an audience. and those are kind of questions you think about as an attorney presenting a case, you know. so, you know, i think there's a lot of kind of a dialect going back and forth between the disciplines for me. :  yeah it is true and having that stability and that sort of...having that sort of uh...having that stability gives you the freedom to make work without necessarily being concerned about its marketability or its sort of desirability as an object, um for particular collector class. so... that was really important for me to have that financial stability to let the art sort of develop. it's but its now i think that last year actually i made a pretty good um... pretty good income as an artist, working with a gallery, and um- kind of thinking about the art market as not necessarily, i mean it's a particular characteristic of a portion of the art world and um... and so trying to navigate that and find ways where your ideas can can... live on and have traction in a particular audience um, who really thinks about art, i think its important to figure out your place in that market too so. i- i wouldn't have been able to figure that out in an earlier stage in my career as an artist and so i really think i needed to have you know the stability of having that kind of day job and an alternate career um so yeah. but it's still a question for me because i have you know colleagues in the art world who- you know  took a different route of just going all in and just you know putting their energies into it without a safety net essentially and you know had good success with that because of their commitment to it. so... i think everyone approaches you know these kind of decisions differently. now i'm still trying to find what the next sort of step is for me of these choices. :  um... you mean when i was a kid?probably, i mean i don’t know when-it happened for everybody at different times. could have been at birth. (everybody laughs) : yeah i don't remember anything. but i-um, i do know um my mom saved a lot of stuff when i was growing up,  i was always drawing, i was always inventing little sort of worlds in my drawing and- and i don’t think i ever really uh conceived of being an artist as a career,  it was always drummed into my head very much that you know you're gonna be a lawyer you know and uh : yeah : what's that?  : [cheer] : we actually did use a lot of creative um uh skills in you know both campaigning and both- and but also when we were involved in doing student government. we were doing a lot of different publications or um posters or things like that and i was very involved in all that kind of design work and the messaging and things like that. i approached it as a creative endeavor. um so, i think that was another step in the process of like seeing how those creative skills could help um-help in terms of communicating a particular political message. i mean what's interesting about a political art is that it works i think very  differently than a lot of the art you would consider sort of contemporary fine art. um in that, i think political art really seeks to occupy the entire field of discussion you know, to present a frame in which you can't see the world any other way but the way i'm presenting it to you, you know. and uh, i think in contemporary art there's more value placed in the kind of ambiguity and open- openness in the meaning. more in the involvement in a discursive experience with a viewer than in political art. but in college, i mean, it's really focusing on working it in more of a political way so um... : captology? no : mhm :  in the law? : oh the visual artwork yeah. yeah. i think, the thing about art is that its- at this stage in the game its... we're – i think people make the argument that its sort of a historical period. people are really drawing from all periods of of art history and mulitple disciplines to kind of- creating these kind of pastiches that really... represent their particular world view. and i think- so its hard to sort of pinpoint- for me, what the uh... where the kind of, shifting between kind of uh that more dogmatic or... propagandistic kind of approach to art making and then this sort of ambiguous and open meaning kind of work. i think that...i think that what art- art does is different than you know the kind of persuasion you do in the court is that people's expectations are different, about that particular context you know. when you go into a gallery or museum you know, there is already- because of your preconceptions of what art's function is, that people are willing to experience what you have to offer maybe a little bit more. and i think in- in law, you're already in a situation where its usually adversarial um... and fact finders like judges are already kind of- so steeped in you know people seeking to persuade them that there's uh- they're at a certain, you know. there's so much i think professional cynicism that the- the kind of things that matter um become less about you're – i think the things that matter and you have control over change you know. um so, so yeah. but i am always thinking about those things you know, that- because i think even in art, sometimes i think that the extent to which art matters you know and uh... i always think that its gotta matter in some way, it changes things, it transforms people's values in some way or hones their creative-critical sort of thinking skills in some way. so i feel like i'd like to make work that does that you know so but yeah i don't know if it's totally futile yeah.  : i think my mom. and you know in different stages uh, in our lives she's had different kinds of influences. i think when i we were younger, she was very powerful, um positive force. she- she was very nurturing in a lot of ways. highly critical but in a kind of always pushing sort of always trying to pushing for you to do better. : uh, and you know, trying to create as many opportunities as possible for me to sort of grow and develop. she had me playing violin at an early age, um. and uh : 5, 5 years old and i played all the way until i was 18. um... and um tutors, you know. sports, and everything like that she wanted to give us as much opportunity, as many activities as possible so every day over the week we were pretty much schedules and packed and so, i think i developed a certainum habit of work and uh, just being busy. yeah. um, i think around when i was 17 or 18 she uh... she had a nervous breakdown and um you know, really kind of uh developed a lot of different mental illness. um, which i think has had real profound effect on me and i think its influenced my uh- the kind of subjects i sort of deal with in the arts too. she- she has- she's borderline personality, major depressive disorder, chronic pain syndrome um, so in- you know its not always easy to tell what's real and what's not. when you're being sort of manipulated you know, as a function of i think the disorders, there's always this need to um control people around you, to fill some sense of a lack of self-esteem and. but the pain management stuff became very um... and it still is,  this kind of haze. it's not clear what's um- i think whether or not she believes really in the pain um, i mean and it seems like she does, but you know it doesn't seem so, but then sometimes i’m not sure if it's being used to sort of manipulate you know, and there's these addiction issues that come from chronic use of pain medication and so, i think have a very – extremely high tolerance for ambiguity  you know in my life, just managing that you know and i think its the way i see the world, and so i think that's what i end up you know, working with in my art you know. so, yeah its kind of a- it's not necessarily a mentorship relationship but a condition in my life that i think i’m responding to by creating work that seeks to find beauty in that ambiguity. : yeah : affective fluctuations? : wild fluctuations : well i think the management comes in the power of authorship, you know. i think yeah the themes that sort of emerge in the work involve you know conflict and uh um and sort of dramatic um, fluctuations.  that’s also just good drama though right. in literatures, tragedy and conflict, driving narratives. so maybe that’s part of the reason you know literature is kind of the creative mode that i look to in the art making you know.  i think that there’s also in the way that the art functions, there is always this kind of question of uneasiness with the viewer that i think you know, there’s- there's an easiness about the ethics of deception in work and um- and uh a kind of...but i think there’s also a need to try to find something that help- that brings those questions to some kind of resolution. whether or not it’s just a sense of beauty or um... uh sort of more, more of an awareness about the sort of levers and mechanisms of how we understand things to be true um. so i think that’s very much part of the work.  : well i am- my wife. i married an artist as well and um –coughs- i think that’s been really critical too because we have kind of different priorities in art in a way. i mean she’s very much about a sense of craftsmanship well and thinking about the artist as a skilled artisan where the technical skills are- are more- more important in a way than just the idea. the idea without a skilled execution um is- is less valid as art making. and so she kind of been- i'm very- i prioritize the idea more than anything, probably run off half the time, half cocked with just the idea if it wasn’t for the kind of uh challenging conversations i have with her working through those ideas and really so. and i feel like i do the same for her you know, skilled execution without an idea, i just feel like it, it doesn’t rise above the medics, imitation you know. so, i think she’s been really really important uh for me in the last- ever since i met her.  i feel like there’s been a lot of growth in me as an artist because of her. : um about nine years ago. and you know the other thing is that because my life is so impacted schedule wise with all the different stuff i do as a lawyer and an artist that being able to have those kinds of conversations at home. it’s like carving out and dedicating parts of my life uh, my home life to art.  it’s something that we really enjoy, those exchanges with each other too. so it builds our relationship but at the same time it gives us both space to continue our studio time outside the studio so.  : um, it was actually uh my dad uh loved world war i movies um and there’s this movie called sergeant [pt name]/ :/and he thought it was the sergeant’s first name.  : so- well that’s his story-interviewers laugh-: but my mom’s story is that she uh- she found it in the back of a name book and it means “sacred tree” i think and um, it’s an anglo-saxon name, so she just liked the image of a tree for its sort of poetic properties so. so i’m not sure which one’s the right story/ : maybe both at the same time. : not that many, but when i do- i have encountered people, not in person, just sort of in these weird interactions where like i was trying to change a flight reservation and they wanted my middle initial too and i said i should be the only [pt name] on the flight, and they were like, "no there's two others" : and it was just the most bizarre moment, had this thought of these doppelgangers running around-interviewer 2 giggles-: out there :- laughs- yeah i'll stay on the flight just so i can stand there with the [pt name]'s  : no i didn’t get a picture, they're out there : clones-all laughing and giggling throughout the exchange- : yeah. i have some habits that are important to string together um. my thinking around projects- the production is probably- like heavy production is more sporadic, but i do try to go into the studio 2-3 times a week in the evenings and uh um the sort of daily habits i have, i keep a journal where i jot down ideas and um- the ideas are usually written in command form like you know. research uh the um catcher in the rye themes for the next project and um, buy bamboo and play with the bamboo and see if it might work for a particular sculpture you know. so that’s how the journal i generally keep. although when i do research i'll write research at the top and trying to jot down lots of quotes or texts that leap out to me and, so that’s a part of it, i think um. : yeah. yeah i mean it’s a way of taking ideas and operationalizing them in some way you know. : in action : right. because i think that. it’s a thing i kind of think about it like moving chess pieces on a board you know there may be multiple pieces on the board and different projects that i'm working on at once and so when i take action i’m just moving a piece and um yeah. so if you just keep moving the pieces i, eventually they’ll start to coalesce into the projects into a show and at that point you go into heavy production and then you edit down. and i think that part, there was a long time, where journaling was more like what my process was like and then i would just jump in the studio and then execute. but i think that you know my wife has really encouraged me to do more-there's a whole other  stage of making and looking in the studio. where thinking habits can’t happen just in a journal or just you know visualizing objects or pieces in your mind so. that’s more of part of my practice now having those studio time and uh just sitting there looking.  : what's that? : yeah i do that a lot : i do that a lot. um and, um yeah. there's a lot of iteration. because lately i've been working a lot more with multiples, you know things that are readily reproducible. been using sort of a copy machine, and uh, and i've been newspapers as a source material for everything that’s sort of the role i've kind of set myself for the work that i’m doing. just- i'll just go through newspapers and find images that pop out to me and clip them out and then once i have a pile of it, begin sorting you know. so there’s a lot of sorting and trying to find connections between images that make sense that are pleasing, that are disconcerting, and then you start you know copying them um. so i'm interested in right now uh- high reproducibility and also multiple mediations you know where you’re taking something from one place and running it through one filter, and you're running it through another filter and eventually you’re manipulating it at each step and so it gets farther and farther way from the source, making it something new and part of the reason i can do that is because you know accept reproducibility as a condition of art production now so its not about the unique mark,  its not about the sort of-the old artistic gesture of having to be your hand, its your subjectivities in the system that you create you know and uh so yeah. i’ve been doing a lot of that sorting, revising, and reproducing. iterations. it could be one thing, and then i’ll try four different things to see which one reads better than the others so um. : it's also different because some of the tests they have its not generative as much it is reacting to things and recognizing partners and sorting them, maybe doing some interventions into them that reference some art historical um period or concept that you might be interested in and bringing that work into dialogue with that history but you know its more the recognition and the patterns, so it’s a different kind of art-creative muscle, collaging rather than creating something entirely internally you know. : yeah. but i think the question of collaging and appropriation and um reproducibility is more interesting to me than originality- because it pushing up against originality and authenticity you know. so those questions i have about the visceral realist and what’s real and what's not- like they’re- its more condensed you know. all of these questions, i’m looking for a way to make them more apparent in a single work, a single moment, all at once.  : uh huh : yeah. i think the journal is an important way i sort of maintain a working memory of the concepts um. and um i –i guess you can call it like a small hard drive- of visual working memory for pieces that i might be trying to think through um and it helps with transitions too between heavy studio periods carrying over you know. particularly troublesome pieces, trying to figure out what's wrong with it, i’ll carry that image in my head and try to- i can manipulate it in my head in a way because i keep thinking about it and keep thinking of ways for it to be rearranged but i think that actually being in the studio and laying it out being able to visualize it helps you to not get stuck with too many ideas you know. externalizing it is important um yeah. (camera beeps) did i use up an entire memory card?-interviewer 2 laughs- : oh okay : yeah well i think that was one of the- the challenges with some of the exercises um that we- that i did um. having a time constraint to generate lots of ideas- not only generating ideas but also having them be unusual or uh special in some way all at once i think it is more challenging. because for me, i really try to separate out those processes of the initial brainstorm in which you inhibit that critical voice and allow yourself freedom and permission to be ordinary or unusual. you know and put them all out there, and then move into a phase of refinement and critical judgment and sorting out the ideas that rise to the top. at that point, you give them sort of greater weight. so for me they're very important to keep them distinct and separate, and i felt like that one- those couple of tests where we’re kind of given a time limit and told to generate those ideas and that they have to be unusual or exceptional in some way, there was a little bit of a clogging up of like uh my creative process so uh. that’s important. i think um in the critical judgment phase what you have to inhibit is attachments you know. to ideas that may be you know good but not exceptional and so being able to let it go and push it aside is pretty important. : you know i was a painter for a lot of years before i shifted into that more sort of that conceptual artmaking mode and that was a very big part of it, letting go. maybe have painted something to a certain point and you like the way it looks and to continue forward you're going to destroy where you're at but if you stop you reach that higher level and so always making that question of when is that painting done and how much farther do we push it and uh and how much am i going to let go and not be attached or nostalgic to an earlier iteration of it is very important. : yeah
is there any message that you get : i think i have a sense of excitement and satisfaction you know, with where its at. not just sort of run of the mill, ah that looks good, but one in which where i feel kind of supercharged by what i’ve made you know. and i think also that the way i’ve dealt with this questions of attachments is that the reproducibility allows me to have multiple reiterations and so i can see it all at once, um. so you can- i just decided on a way of working where i can really lay it all out and i can keep it even you know, the ones i am attached to and may not be the right thing for this particular piece but i’ll keep it around. so there’s a lot of keeping stuff around too and just organizing it but i think that sometimes you may- there was a reason why you made it and it may become an element of something else later.  and so that -so i  learned if you surround yourself with things that interest you, that intrigue you and you like in what you’re making, they just- they can become elements in later, later cycles too so. : hm : yeah : it does. i would call it the [name] effect, which is my wife's name.-all laugh-: because she- she's always you know kind of pushing me to understand that you know. it cant all just be in your head, you won't see it right, in the right way. there's a whole other new phase of looking by externalizing it. its true- if it’s not clogging up these images that you want to keep because they're impetuous of something, if you externalize it, it really does i really feel that freedom to then, you just sort of look and think about that piece without that anxiety of forgetting and losing you know. so i think that's really cool that’s something that’s been observed as a specific phenomenon i guess or/ : /function.  : malcolm gladwell's : yeah : yeah : yeah it only gets to a certain stage. because you can only manipulate the image in your mind uh to a certain degree and yeah you'll find new things when its externalized  : so : yeah : um... yeah well just one thing i'm really curious about is- i mean i feel this but somehow i still manage to get by. i don't have a lot of down time generally but i feel like it is really important to have that space where your minds not cluttered by lots of things. for it to wander, you know. i've tried, i've been able to get by by these sort of systems i put in place- you know these habits i do over time and between worlds. um but um just wondering how important that is to have that kind of down time. its something i just have uh an intuition about. it seems like when i'm bored i really come up with great ideas um. and then when i'm really busy i seem to just you know really be no good in the studio at all and so just wondering about that.  : right : yeah :  i did pretty good for like four minutes, and then i just started drifting off and started thinking about what i was going to do tomorrow : yeah –laughs- : and then there's people who have a thought from like 20 years ago and still live it like its today so  : right right : yeah yeah i mean even just doing the associative tasks.-the more i could relax and just you know kind of just blank out and see the words, the more the words would come to me as opposed to feeling anxious and needing to finish then suddenly there's all this interference that starts to get in the way : yeah  : some people can do that  : yeah  : well, i guess that.. let me think... i think that when i have a personal connection to someone — someone contacts me and you know some project has been important for them, because a lot of my work deals with more activism in that—it’s kind of a tool and i think of my art now as a way to communicate ideas and concepts that i think are important to me and my work is often times more politicized, so when i feel like i have been capable of conveying of some of these ideas and it resonates with people, and maybe like when we did this collaboration, invisible five, which is an environment justice - it’s an audio tour. so these aren't are exactly visual but there's visual components and things. but we made this audio tour and you’re supposed to drive the landscape and take in the landscape. you can listen to the audio and do multitasks, right? you can’t do that when you watch a video. so you can drive your car, you can listen, and it ended up being used by [university 1] and some [name of group] groups as an education tool. they used it as a way to when they were sort of vetting new people for you know their programs in that for people in the field and i thought if those experts are using our project in this way that means that we did a good job. that it meant it was important in that because to represent a community—a lot of this work is about being embedded in communities and creating a kind of creative construct, whatever that may be. if it’s a website or a body of photography or an audio tour or a book project—that is supposed to really show their story, and that takes time and investment. so when people come back and have had an experience or they have been touched in some way, for me that's important.  : well, yeah, i mean i’m looking for new... you know i’m not necessarily interested in the kind of - the establishment in that. i’m working in terms of—the kind of work i do is more like what is called social practice or public practice, it's not so media driven, like i'm a painter, i'm a photographer, whatever musician. it combines a lot of different media in it. so, i think it’s important to not rely on something that is established and safe. i want to be out of that kind of safety zone and um – like i don’t even really necessarily define sometimes what i'm doing, although the outside does in sort of art because my work is very cross disciplinary, so i have an interest in cultural geography which can be visual. i can do that as a documentary photographer and i can document a landscape and a place using sort of the tools of research that a cultural geographer would use. so, i’m trying to push into new kinds of realms - they're not necessarily new but at the same time i do feel like we are in a culture and a timeframe where we are bombarded with so much visual information and i tell my students it’s not possible to do something original. this idea of it’s never been done and i say just forget about that, because we are always appropriating, we're rearranging, we're reconstructing, we're deconstructing, we're doing these types of things and that’s okay, it’s okay to appropriate. we have these people like duchamp and all these people that have showed us, you know, that a urinal can be a piece of art, right? so this is a part of contemporary art discourse and dialogue and where do you go from there? the great thing about practicing as an artist now is everything is wide open. i mean you can do things for the traditional kind of market driven economy, which is not so much my interest, making objects to collect to display and use as a source of property or commerce and we are sort of in the kind of - some artist work goes for thousands and thousands of dollars for a contemporary artist and then there's art that is very ephemeral and not - it can’t be sort of necessarily valued through capitalism. that's equally as viable, so i think it’s interesting for artists to be working right now because we have - everything is so open to look into for subject matter now.   : yeah we did  : i thought it was sort of funny doing that. i thought it was sort of like oh are you schizophrenic –laugh-, that’s sort what i take away. : well, i definitely feel like i am neurotic on certain levels, but not to a point where i am dysfunctional, but i have anxiety, i remember going through that. it was sort of hard because it was like well how - you know, but i have definitely experienced being stressful and things like that too so   : to be that you're more disagreeable. : really wow.  : yeah, i think and for others, other friends of mine that i think are very creative types, there is always a lot of - like i was just up in [city] and a group of people that are all pretty much artists and very - i love the conversations because they are very spirited and everyone is talking and opinions and ego and personality. and i welcome that, i like that and i’m passionate about my ideas.  :(deep breath) um… well, i mean i think early on when i was very young, i was a very mediocre student. both my folks, they just finished high school so i was the first to have gone through college and through a graduate program, and now i teach as a professor at [university 2], and i never was exceptional. i never really was gifted in a sense where i could pick up an instrument you know. i did sports. i excelled in sports.  : i was a runner, i was a swimmer, and i played basketball, but mostly track. i did pretty well in those sports and i actually sort of became less interested when i really became interested in art. i would say that i was a very average student until maybe tenth, eleventh grade and then i had a very good arts instructor and i was in a program at my high school that focused on design, graphic design and that and it really opened up. around same time, somehow i didn’t really do good in sciences and things like that, i have a tendency to think that it was the ways – the way that we were taught in those public schools, which were good. but suddenly they took me and put me in advance placement literature and english courses, you know, so i went from very average to – and um in arts. so i think i’m much more of an arts kind of personality, so sort of overcoming this idea that some people come from families that their parents were actors or they have been immersed in that field, in a creative field, um you know a professor or you know, and that wasn’t my case. so i think overcoming this type of maybe it was the idea of myself that i think people would even say do you want to pursue this? is it a valid thing for you to pursue? and then when i started to have—like i had a really great arts professor my freshman year who was very supportive of me and actually gave me a senior studio when i was a freshman because i was so focused in that. he told my parents that you know she’s gifted or whatever he said and you need to support her, not that they weren’t, but those things i think – i don't feel like i was – i was really positioned in a way where i wasn't exposed, although my father, he's a picture framer and he was interested in art, but they didn’t come from it in an educated kind of being sort of culturally immersed through their family background, so i think that’s what i feel like - i've often felt like either – there were times people didn’t take me seriously, maybe the way i looked or something like that those were the sort of things i would have to overcome. : i think that i’m nice looking, you know, and maybe that they didn’t take me seriously. : something along those - i don't want to be\ : yeah, you know whatever this is your - that type of - i think that was something that i had to overcome to show that you know i was a thinking human being, too. so those may have been some things early on. now this has been quite a long time and i’m pretty much a type of person who got involved in art making from very early on and i knew exactly once i was in eleventh, twelfth grade that’s what i wanted to pursue and i've done that my entire life. i’ve known. some people come to the arts late in life and they excel, but it was something that i always - that’s all i know how to do.  interviewer: since the 10th grade? : yeah. i’m interested in other things, but this is the way i communicate best, so that's what i’ve - you know i've thought sometimes i would’ve liked to have gone into maybe environmental law or activism um, you know dealing with some of the issues that i am interested in, or some kind of management or um, you know sciences and things like that dealing with um, yeah so. : [name of pt's project] : well, for me it’s completely natural, and it’s something that i feel like have had to sort of like, go to the dean’s office, go show people, like artists are capable of working along in – along with researchers or even being researchers or understanding data and doing these things instead of just like making graphics. you know there used to be this - artists are doing that now. there is a lot of history of that. my work when i was younger and i did fairly well getting my work out in the [area in state 1] in that was dealing more with personal narratives and histories. i was working in very visual arts, one of a kind sculptural pieces that had a lot of references to art history to all sorts of histories and comparative religion and things like that. and i went to graduate school and i basically stopped that work, 'cause i sort of felt pulled into understanding things that i thought were important to me and nature being outdoors. i’m an only child, i spent a lot of time outdoors in [state 2]. i ran sort of wild. i was always climbing trees and that's very much a part of me. i sort of reconnected with that in the mid-90s being out in landscapes and that and i was becoming really aware of a lot of environmental issues that struck a cord, so i started to focus more on landscape and that and i was also sort of pulling away. i think it was a result of working on computers all the sudden where i didn’t use a computer until about 1995. never touched one. i got a very big job, i was able to invest in a big system and once i did i had to learn how to use photoshop, all the graphics arts because of this investment, and then suddenly about three years later i'm teaching it. so that was sort of maybe interesting because i hadn’t even delved in that. doing research and sort of web, but i started to bring together these issues that i was interested in that dealt with landscape, environment, and that, and i also at the same time sort of dropped these kinds of works i was doing that were very manipulated kinds of imagery that were almost like multiple exposures, thing you can do very easily say in a program called photoshop, and i think this is interesting because as soon as it was very easy for me to do that, whereas i did this all mechanically through multiple exposures with a camera, i was disinterested because i think it was also we were sort of flooded with this kind of imagery. and i realized then i went into more realism. so i went from sort of focused on surrealism to realism and then sort of documentation and thinking more in a sort of a journalistic manner with work, and then that work since ninety-eight through graduate school, it’s pretty much i’ve been doing sort of the same thing for the last fifteen years. i’ve been working in the [state 1] desert region primarily, documenting various subcultures and places sort of on the margins of society, hinterlands, and sort of exploring these and using these as the source of my work. : that have inspired me? : well i think, you know, just experiences that i had as a child have definitely focused. i can think of certain key experiences. i was actually thinking of this recently because i had just done a project on salmon on - it was for the [constitutional body] in 2000 and it dealt with an endangered listing of salmon in an urban space. i did a very educational project and i was very interested in doing that project 'cause i grew up in [state 2] and at one point my father took me to the river - i used to fish with him 'cause i was the only child and so i did sort of boy - it was very - what's the word - i didn’t have a very gendered childhood let’s say. we went and saw a salmon run spawning up the river and it was - i was pretty young and i don’t if you know what spawning salmon look like but they look like monsters. they become bright red, they have - the males have these big sort of hook mouths and the whole river is filled with these things. they are quite large. i mean it’s frightening really. it’s - i’m sure for very small children it would be very scary, but i was sort of terrified. it was one of those kind of sublime experiences. and if you look at the word sublime, it’s about a terror that is sort of beyond, it was like that. and that stuck with me, and i realized even though i was very young that that was something very special, very important. and when i actually learned about the process and learned about the ecology and the life cycle and how it pertained to the native american culture and all of these sort of things, that was very important when i did this project. so, i was watching something recently that brought me back to thinking about that and that was one thing i think that instilled a certain kind of way of thinking, and it was a very visual memory. i don’t remember the smell. i don’t remember the sounds. i remember what it looked like. and so i think that has - was one of the water shed kind of experiences that i had that maybe brought me back to thinking of the environment and that in my work.  : mh hm. well there is a beauty to it too. : i can’t explain it, i wasn’t frightened. i was in complete awe in the way that it was sort of terrifying at the same time, but absolutely maybe beautiful to see. there was an energy or something that i didn’t know what the words were, i probably still don’t understand that, but i somehow - you know it's a very clear image for me, i was very young. : yeah, i mean i try - i think that the kind of - when i’m framing a photograph or i’m looking at a certain - i’m looking for those kinds of - and i've done a couple images that people you know i know think sort of like they're stunning kinds of images. so i think - i know what that's about and how to photograph something in a way that can be constructed to have that power. 'cause i think good images - like there's a photographer, edward prutensky, who did this film, manufactured landscapes, who does landscape photography. i really recommend it. his are these sublime images of how humans are modifying, changing the environment.  : well she's done personal narratives, she's done you know things that deal with body politic, deal with gender issues, sexuality and that, those kind of identity, but also landscape and she's interested in – and also a politicized landscape, you know, yeah.  : yeah, i mean there's definitely affinity for - and i haven’t really seen what she's been doing recently, but yeah definitely. i think a lot of contemporary photographers were interested in because of, you know especially landscape, it’s a critical viewpoint. it’s a way to really, you know, the work that i really like is like that. : well, a lot of the stuff that influences me is also writing. i read a lot of that and i started writing myself. my publisher encouraged me because i'm - when i was working on my salt and sea work, i was photographing this place and i needed to understand why it was the way it was and the processes and the biological processes, the cultural politic of that particular landscape and i also needed to show - i needed to be able to explain to my audience. i didn’t feel like i could just put an image and sort of leave it. so my work became very invested and very - text is very important in all my projects. so, i’m influenced by a lot of reading, mostly nonfiction. i have some friends like my friend, [friend], is this author that i think i mentioned to you who i actually - she's a personal friend but i’m in awe of her work because she's such a beautiful writer and she's so knowledgeable, but the way she weaves in disparate ideas and topics and things into a piece is what i’ve really learned from her. the way that you can show people a new way of considering that they're not - it’s not something that’s really apparent. and so i’m always looking for those types of people and things. i mean there is such a variety of influences but i probably look less at other artists. i mean there are some artists that i really like, contemporary artists like [artist 1] whom i happen to - i was able to go on a residency and meet him in person. you know there's lot of people in the arts and that, but i think, you know a lot of it is first-hand experience too of me being very - i do a lot of fieldwork. that my work is - like right now is primarily about being embedded in places and talking and conversation - like i said, social practice. and then making that into a kind of form which has visuals and audio and text, installation for the audience.  : well, i try to do projects that have multiple entry points, so there could be a book publication, there could be an exhibition. i’ve been doing quite a few of these audio tours where people can download an audio tour on their computer or on their mobile phone, and then there is a map, and you go out to a place and maybe you go for a drive. i'd like to do a hike where it’s sort of the media augmented type of experience. so, i really like it when people have that it’s more interactive and not just interactive by hitting buttons and things but where they’re actually experiencing it in sort of first person. if there is a way to bring them into the project further through them sharing commentary and that, that could be part of it as well. so, there is a more traditional kind of experience that a visual arts or photographer where there is an exhibition and there’s visuals, there’s photographs and collected - like i do a lot of installation work where i collect ephemera and stuff and put that together as some kind of repository. like i’m working on large-scale video projection. you worked with [artist 2]?  : i love his work. he’s amazing. -laugh- he’s really amazing. : yeah. the [name of artist 2's project], oh yeah that's sort of - i think about that actually a lot for this project i’m working on, [name of pt's project], because the video at the end of the project, i’m working on it for two years and now through the [art foundation]. there’s going to be a large-scale video installation, and i wanted to do big images again because i was doing smaller images and i thought now that video is like such high resolution, it’s like film, i could project the image because i really want people who come into the space who may not have a chance to visit the dessert to really have this very visceral - and so it will be more in the sense of where his piece - some of his pieces are very experiential. they're not traditional documentaries and that, so yeah he’s been an inspiration to the kind of work.  : oh yeah i was too : yeah, the mri - i was thinking about - i was thinking it was like - there's a lot of electronic, sort of industrial stuff that my friend - i kept thinking of it in those - i can totally see him using that. yeah cause he, yeah totally... yeah, i think we are always like – you know experiences like that where we are always thinking about the potential, the possibilities of whatever, you know - i think that's the reason people daydream too. they're sort of getting into that kind of creative thought process.  : i think i try to let students know - well there's professionalism. okay so these are just sort of the common things, but intuition i think is really important. i think to follow your intuition or sort of feeling about something. if it seems to be right, i think we should trust ourselves intuitively. i think experimentation is very, very important and to go against the grain and to do things that they say, you know, if it’s this particular media project - like i worked with polaroid material. i used to cut em up, taking them apart, do transfers, you know, i would really mess those things up, and that's sort of normal to even some of the imaging programs on the cellphones i notice have little borders and things that sort of look like the things that we used to do with these materials, you know, and now that’s common. so, i’m always trying to make students consider and think out of the box. i teach at a university, not at an art school, and i think that it’s really important to think across disciplines, to think outside of visual arts, and all the time i have to - sometimes i have students that say i - like i give them an open project at the end of the semester where they have to come up and propose an idea on occasion, i have students they don’t have an idea, which boggles the mind for me. and so i go through and i say, "well what do you like to do outside of art", because they're only thinking of what they see. they’re not sort of thinking that their life experience could possibly be a study for a photograph, you know, or some interests they have. and so, you know, sort of having them not just think about art with a big a, to think about how can you  find creativity in everything, in what you eat, how you prepare that, how you maybe curate a walk or something or you know. there are so many things that you can do creatively, and i think everyone is a creative person. so there's ways to - and i’ve worked with students that aren’t art students, some of the best students with some of the courses that i put together. sometimes i prefer those kinds of students, you know and just giving them like really simple tools to record or document or make art out of.  : well, i think like for anything it’s just being present. if you’re not focused, if you're not – if you have too many distractions, you're not going to be there to be able to take that in. you know, i think there is talent, some people have certain skills. i can’t really draw, you know i’m terrible, that’s the reason i started as a photographer. i’m good in terms of design. i have a good design sense and formal kind of ideas of balance and all those kind of - but i think that’s, you know, that’s very - it doesn’t have much to do with ultimate creativity and people who really i find are really great thinkers or creative thinkers, because you can be very mechanical and you can do something, you know draw every detail in this room but it may not say anything. it may not have any conceptual - it’s just purely mechanical. so you have to have a marriage of curiosity and taking chances to be able to - you know i think curiosity is probably one of the most important things for a creative person for an artist. if they don’t have that and they don’t want to get out of their comfort zone, you know.  : yeah um, well you mean in my students how i sense? : i think it’s the complexity or something where i'll see someone... it’s ironic or there is some depth to that that takes beyond sort of this like a simple analogy and that and just being surprised and um... i’m trying to think of an example but i can’t really think of something, but those - i think those kind of connections - i think that’s one thing that artists are really good of being at to look at disparate things or objects and sort of putting them together to create a new kind of language or order um... yeah i don’t know if that answers that question.  : i need to um… okay so i'll say one thing. i think a lot from my work... i need - and i’m an only child too but i would say it’s a pretty selfish pursuit. i need to really focus, and when i do focus i can really, really focus on something. someone brought to my attention that we had gone to school together, and she’s a great writer she’s fantastic, and she’s studied visual arts, and she says, "you know i just don’t have the discipline that you have to be able to focus in a way and i think that’s something that’s sort of important", so this almost this kind of selfish kind of, you know, i have to a lot times spend... when i’m writing i have to be very quiet and um not too many distractions and things like that, and i have to get into a certain kind of space to - and when i was doing more like painterly work when i was younger, it would become almost like a meditation, you know it becomes very sort of intense and obsessive. i think there is a lot of obsession about... that kind of production for me. that is sort of the kind of classic depiction of an artist or something, you know that the kind of stereotype, and i think that exists you know, i think there’s part of that. i’ve heard of other people though, like [artist 3], you know they could have like ten tvs or you know have all of these different distractions and that was the kind of environment they really liked to be in.  : no, i need focus um... i need to be sort of immersed and embedded. you know like right now it’s taken me a couple of weeks of just getting out of teaching mode and commuting back and forth just to be able to get back into my project and starting to really think about that.  : yeah, yeah. i mean i find myself having to be pretty structured at times. sometimes when i am working, it’s hard for me to not work. i would say i am a very obsessive person and i wouldn’t say necessarily compulsive, but um driven in that way. so, it’s almost like i have to pull myself away to say i need time off, you know? i need to stop because i get very sort of immersed in what i'm doing. : yeah yeah yeah definitely. i mean i experience that more when i’m doing writing, but you have to understand a lot of my process i do a lot of writing to sort of think about what i’m going to be doing visually or how those things are going to come together or how those ideas come together, so yeah, i have to have a certain kind of flow, but i can - i mean i can sit for like eight, ten hours you know, in front of the computer and that’s not very healthy, you know? so : yeah yeah and i have to sort of stop and tell myself, you know, um it’s not so much now that i’m older but when i was younger i would be pretty obsessive about working in the studio and that. but when i do separate, i completely separate from. i take completely take time off so. : i can sort of turn off and sort of do, yeah. : oh yeah, that's a lot of focus huh : pumpkin carver? she's like a professional pumpkin carver?  : yeah, see that’s the way i am. yeah, i’m more on that, yeah. : yeah. or i would say if i had to like i would be more on that side of things.  : sure. yeah i think so. i think that, you know, and i’ll go through that process, but i think that there is a point where you have to come back to that intuition and really trust that to not to overdo something. like a painter who keeps going in until it becomes muddy, you know, and there was a point in time and they needed to have that awareness to be able to stop. some things, you know, maybe music is more this way, but sometimes you get it right. like i’ve looked at photo shoots where i’ve often times get more in a groove and then i get the better images later, but then sometimes they are right in the beginning, you know? the best images. but i think that is very healthy especially for students. and um also, scrapping. you know like your initial idea isn’t necessarily - that is process i think is so important. like most of the work i do now is really about process. i’m actually - the artist are the process of my thinking of how like i get interested in this, and i write and do like an essay about this, and you know sort of jumping around and then how that forms something a larger picture, so i think process and process oriented arts or performance are very very interesting. and i don’t know how versioning works out with that, but um you know i think it really just depends  : yeah, or i will work on something and i’ll leave it for awhile, like a lot do and come back to it. i multitask a lot, you know? and i have to out of - i don’t really have a choice with you know just - and i think i multitask - like most of us a lot more than we used to just because of technology and things like that. and a variety communication devices and you know all the thing that we have to deal with, so we're sort of training ourselves now to - i read something about how like when you google - that’s a far more natural thought process, the way that we make associations constantly in our brain, and so rather than reading linear through something you know it’s okay to jump around to different parts of it and then instead of reading as beginning to end. so, you know i find those kinds of processes but that can be debilitating, too. you can also get nothing done if you don’t do that.  : yeah, i mean where i get too scattered. yeah yeah i get sometimes - well you’re very ordered here but, you should see some of the office that i’ve seen for some professors. and some of it - you know they talk about that ordered chaos - some of the people they have the messy offices. they know where everything is and they're not spending all of the time putting everything away so they're actually more efficient.   : oh, that happens all the time. and there's things that i was interested in that i come back or some of the... you know i was interested in the [valley] —the kind of history of the water politic there years and years ago, but i didn’t actually work on that project until about five years ago where i made it a focus. so, yeah i mean those things are always coming together and um i find myself collecting books or i'll make notes... um i also have lists of things that if i’m interested in i'll have those lists so i can have a memory of them that way. but there's also just things in my head and i'll will realize, "oh, that’s how this can somehow connect with this". you know it’s that connectivity i was talking about that - you know and then a lot of the ideas are things that i’m continuously interested in so there always coming back up to the surface and then maybe you know they're not used so they go below the surface and then you know it’s always evolving. so i think for a lot of us - and i think that’s when you think of a kind of body of work or a visual representation of what that trajectory is or what that person’s style is has a lot to do with this. these are the things that we keep coming back almost like arc types in our work that are... you know they’re - it’s the kind of icons and things that we're working with and those things are something that um you know are always being resurfaced.  : well, yeah, i have to -laughing-, i have to keep a calendar. are you talking about physical ways for us to memorize things or?  : i try to write those ideas down if i get a flash of something and hold it because sometimes you know you forget things, and it’s almost like that game, and i was very good at that when i was a kid, concentration, you know? the cards? and being able to remember, so that comes into play i think. and it was kind of similar when we were doing kind of, the tests. : yeah, a little bit except for the one that i told you i did poorly at, but um yeah.  : no, not so much, but i’m really interested in the folks that have that kind of - what do they call that mind where they make associations through - like a number is a taste or a color, what is that called? : yeah, that’s very interesting to me.  : yeah, well i think that, you know, the interest in like smells and smell is a direct link to certain memories. those are very visceral kinds of connections that people have. and i think there’s been a little bit of something where when i read about synesthesia and i thought i’m not that way, but i feel like i’ve experienced something sort of similar. like you know representing or thinking of something and something else comes up, but it’s not strong in the way that i know these people - that’s very common for them. : i’ve been interested in multisensory. yeah, i did in my early work this idea of this kind of multisensory environment. i think the part of the reason that i want to get people into the field, i’ve been doing kind of field experiences which are conversations and you know that has a lot to do with it. especially with an extreme environment like the [area of pt's project] which i’m working on now. you really feel that if you’re in the heat, if the smells –inaudible- after a rain has a very particular small, you know? that’s - i want to immerse people so i feel like i need to also facilitate a kind of fieldtrip component to the project where the people who are really interested can do that and get that firsthand. so, i think yeah, those multisensory experiences are really very important.  :  and can you explain inhibiting habits more? : well, i mean i think there is -i sort of have formulas and things like anyone else, but i do think i have and i respect other artists who haven’t necessarily had continued with the same recipe or the same type of - especially if they had some kind of success with a certain kind of work, i think that’s a rut. i’m not interested in getting you know... like this seems to work and people like it and i’m going to continue to do that. i don’t want to do that, so i may have even sort of sabotaged my sort of marketable art life or artwork because i’ve jumped sort of into different medias and forms and things. so, i think that's really important to get out of your comfort zone, but you know sure i’m a creature of habit. you know every morning i get up, the first thing i do when i wake up is make coffee -laughing- because i can’t function without caffeine and there are certain things. but i find things like i really like travel and i really like um - and i think that getting yourself into that kind of state of mind even if it’s like going a different - if you walk to work or whatever going a different route, that’s really important to get out of your regular sort of habits and that. but in terms of being introverted, you know, like i would say that there's parts of me that are very extraverted, there's parts of me that are very introverted and very kind of shy and i can have anxiety attacks. so, it’s sort of the full like i’m sort of both you know depending and um but... yeah i think this idea of travel or and not necessarily traveling somewhere exotic but breaking out of those kinds of day to day habits are healthy for artists. but at the same time, you know, sometimes i feel more productive when i have that very habitual schedule of you know being very focused that way too. i think it depends in what process i’m in 'cause if i’m in the more - the process of conceiving of an idea that's different from than - okay now i know what my focus is, my topic is at hand and now i’m executing it. so, process i think is the time where you really want that type of experience. i just also wanted to say to you that i’ve never been a kind of person that - i don’t lack ideas, i never have been where i’m hitting myself against – my head against the wall like trying to figure out what - i mean i have things that i would like to do, that’s not an issue and i’m sort of confounded when a like student who just says, "i don’t know what to do", you know? i’m like you don’t have any kind of um intuitive you know or... it’s interesting, but i guess that does happen where people create - that kind of creativity doesn’t come natural.  : well i hope so, some of them. i had one come up to a show in san fransisco the other day and he was a great student, it was really nice to see him and, yeah so. interviewer (70): well if you had messages for all the students out there in the world and were forced to digest some tidbits of advice for them, what would you tell them?: like i said, just go with your intuition and we're not always right, us instructors, teachers, professors, you know? so, if you feel strongly about something and yeah, i mean 'cause we don’t always get it right either.  : oh wow. : thanks.  : umm, maybe [project 1] which was called [project 1] that i built in 2010. it was the first big offsite project that i had done. it’s a cycle of nine performances around irrational fear and the financial crisis. and then maybe after that i just umm… the last show i did was at [museum 1] and umm… it was called [project 2] and it was taking umm… the story of the incan conquest— the spanish conquest of the incan empire—and sort of transforming that in sculpturing materials. so we filled this room with gold-tinted wax panels umm after this image of this mythic palace in cuzco and then um… when the spanish conquered the inca they helped the emperor ransom for umm the size of the gallery, 14 by 21 feet to the height of his outstretched hand. so 7 feet high full of gold artifacts, which seems crazy. and umm, they held a mock trial, killed the emperor, and then melted down all of the artifacts into ingots, never recorded what the artifacts were. so i redid this—i accumulated the ransom over months so i cast all of these objects, recast objects like them, carried them from the far corners of new york by hand on public transit to the space every day for months. its face filled up, and at the end we melted it down into these blocks, but sort of at the end a lot of people who saw it earlier were like “i liked it better before… could you bring it back?” and i think for me the destructive element is an ongoing theme in a number of pieces, but thinking about the idea of loss, or like cultural loss, and also the emotions that go with it and the way that that piece brought of that but… i'm working on another project now that’s still two years out but trying to think about the relationship between the physical world and abstraction, and so like all of the speculation around technology companies, the way that the financial system is running largely digitally and kind of what does it mean at this point to have a body for there to be physical things and how—do those things ever get reconciled or do they have to…so but the show is in a space that’s like 270 feet by 55 feet so its this… like an old…two stories of an old mill building with the floor removed. so thinking about that site too and this former industrial space just turned into just like a bubble.  so i don’t know. : i mean thinking about it just as like a—thought bubble or like a blank space for something to happen. : i think i’m interested generally in the works that are most important to me or trying to look at these kind of massive or monumental structures and trying to figure out the human position in relation to them with a lot of the work i think about human agency and sort of how… like if our…just generally thinking about the question of do our actions affect…like can our actions change the world or can they affect change even… and a lot of the work kind of uses the idea of architecture to scale things down so that there’s—your actions have some effect on the physical situation. or that there’s kind of a phenomenological experience of the situation so that maybe it’s less intellectual but more feeling like… like with the ransom room, the transformation of the material or just like the...how much mass something is and that getting reduced or sort of disappeared and thinking about also with these monumental structures like what sort of superstructures or networks or powers that be are required to move them and kind of thinking about… i think also i’ve done a number of projects with institutions including [museum 2] and thinking about these seemingly monolithic institutions as actually the collective sum of these really idiosyncratic individual decisions… and i’ve done these projects where i’ve worked with museums for like a couple years so… like [museum 2] in particular so i know—like i’ve met all these people on the conservation staff and curatorial, like i know the security guards there…and gone through—i did this project where i was going through the third higher archive and thinking about looking at just these chains of email or in the past letters and seeing how certain decisions were made or how certain works came to be there, that it—it’s not this sort of objective sitting down and umm… but it’s a lot of personal relationships and thinking about how those personal relationships kind of accumulate to build this allusion of this institution… so. : yeah i mean i think a lot about… for me because i work with events or sort of work in time a lot, i think a lot about—for me the most important way to get the message across to the viewer is… or the participant even… is to think about their experience of the situation, so i'm very conscious of, for example, sometimes not having a camera present if it’s something that needs to be intimate or how many people are in the room or is this something that could happen at a museum or not… like is this something that has to happen in the middle of the night in an offsite space or something and so there are projects that i won’t do with institutions or if i have a show at a gallery i think about what that—i think a lot about context and just how people experience that… : yeah, i’ve used that model a couple of times. like at this art fair that’s sort of this locus of commerce, thinking about how assign values so i created this speakeasy that’s sort of meant to be like a bank vault but then had the bartenders tell people stories based on these objects from voorhees and kafka short stories… but the idea, it was also really dark inside as opposed to everything else which was just like bright, bright white and sort of trying to create this kind of secret other thing, i think. but i think a lot about how—just all the subconscious ways people experience things and not just the—like i work a lot with research, so i'm like a very intellectual, research-based person, but on the other hand i try to get to the point that… like the kind of illogical sides of that or the way that that’s maybe felt and not—like kind of what’s beyond the spoken. like i think i'm very interested in the ways that a text can express something, but i think if can all be contained within the text, there’s no point in me doing something with it, so i try to think about like what’s outside of just words. : i think i try to think about it structurally. like or a sort of what—and experientially too—and just, i came into making sculpture through minimalism, which was a lot about thinking about the body in relation to these different volumes and thinking about just how you move around a space… and my mother was an architect, and so i spent a lot of time going into half-built houses when i was a kid... “mom we’re trespassing!”… but thinking about… like i’m really sensitive to space generally actually and sort of like the size of space but also thinking about social interactions like… it’s funny ‘cause i had someone say that was giving a lecture when i was in grad school say something like, “you know i’m not—i don’t actually like that many people” and this was an artist that supposedly worked with social practice, and so thinking about all the different experiences of emotion too that can happen with performance that aren’t just like “yay good job” like that it’s not at all about virtuosity or proving my own virtuosity at all but much more about kind of like the possibility of what can happen in a space and sometimes all these different ranges of like disappointment or failure or like kind of seeing these things that are kind of anticlimactic as opposed to everything just being spectacular. : yeah. i think also thinking about what someone thinks about the piece or what they take away like…i think a lot about what are they gonna think you know a week later or a month later or just like a couple hours after like would not just… ‘cause i think some things, even in time, are sort of hard to sit through sometimes and being willing to allow that to be part of it if necessary. and that it’s less about making every moment visceral and pleasurable and… i don’t know… yeah. : yeah. and it’s less about something—generally it’s less about something purely aesthetic or though with the objects ... i kind of think about like i make a lot of sculptures well and i use those as sort of being vessels for other meanings that are either kind of latent or lost or kind of present or like referred back to within the object but the vessel’s sort of like a kind of the physical token for these larger sets of ideas that are kind of floating around it and are they accessible or inaccessible.  : yeah. it was—one of the first performances i did was this piece that was building [city1] in 24 hours—1.238 years per minute—as like a participatory performance and it was at the time the bush administration when “[city 1] wasn’t built in a day” was being used to explain why we couldn’t fix afghanistan, new orleans, everything else. and so thinking about—but at the end of the piece, a band performs as the visigoths and then the city is sacked by the visigoths and what was really interesting to me is that the people who become the visigoths are the people that a minute earlier were kind of like collectively, harmoniously building everything, and every time i’ve done it, it just gets leveled—there’s always someone like beating a dead horse at the end, kind of like really kicking the crap out of some cardboard model and i was like “can you just stop like 5 minutes ago?” but like it—and there’s—there are always kind of this mix of people that were participating that were like “uhh could have not destroyed it that much?” but i think that—i think the pleasure in the destruction is really interesting but then also the aftermath of that and realizing that it kind of take a long—how much time is involved kind of after this kind of either like rebelrous or slightly malicious moment of destruction… like how much time it takes to rebuild after that. i think i'm also interested in those cycles not being symmetrical, like very quickly something can disappear and… what happens afterwards, but that all of it—all of it involves decision-making and not all of that decision-making is rational or fully conceived. but i’m interested—i think i'm interested in loss generally in like a—from a really personal way or something.   : i don’t know but i know that at some point i was thinking about—i had a grandmother who was very uptight about housekeeping and things like that—and any time that i had some ceramics that were from her house, like not fine art pieces but just nice bowls or something and you’d have broken a bowl and just get so upset about that—like—what that object sort of like—it’s not the person but it’s somehow related to the person and by breaking it you’re like a lesser—like you’re not as good a housekeeper as your grandmother or something— you know, something like that. or you’ve—you’re just careless in this way…and so… but i think this—you can’t really get the thing back is powerful. but then also thinking about, well if you can’t get it back then what you do you have to do instead, you can’t just sit there and cry about the bowl forever. and like something… and like what happens after, or something is broken by some external force… like what… like the idea that you have to do something in response to that or—or not do something but um… : my mother was an architect. my father is an engineer and my brother is also an engineer, so i think having that house full of people, my father was really diy and so the weekends in our house were always like building furniture and we grew up in this crumbling victorian so he was always like repainting a room or re-plastering a ceiling but they kept all the old ways of doing stuff so like i spent last christmas helping my dad repair the horsehair plaster in the wall, which is kind of a beautiful process. but it was always—and my grandfather was an engineer who retired on the other side—retired and made paintings and sculptures—and these calder-esque mobiles, but i think having—they both career wise kind of—like my dad never took management positions even though he would have made a lot more money because he always wanted to design and my brother is kind of similar. and my mom—my mom free-lanced from home but was, i think—i think was probably losing her mind the whole time. she had all these like very crafty habits to kind of take up the time when—in the 80s when the building cycle was a little slower, she was designing some houses, not as many as she wanted to be so she was like making nantucket baskets or—she just had like a lot of time—knitting—like time-intensive crafty hobbies, but i think she also ended up living in the suburbs and probably wanted to live somewhere more culturally interesting. but growing up with them—and it was sort of—like i became interested in art when i was really young, like probably five or—like as long as i can remember and always just had you know, whatever…i started doing photography when i was maybe like seven, like i was taking these like gifted student classes or something. so i’d go on the weekends and take like a dark room class or i took hieroglyphics when i was seven, which was actually sort of fed back. i was obsessed with ancient egypt; one of the best collections at the [museum 3] is the mummies because [college 1] had the team that excavated the third of the american team for the great pyramids, which i only later figured out, but i was—i just was completely obsessed with ancient egypt and so like spent all this time thinking about the mummies and reading all these books, but i—i would have a ten book limit when we went to the library ‘cause i was always—every time we went, like visit my grandparents for the weekend i’d bring all these bags of like books and crayons and… i was a weird kid.
interviewer: so you described a memory of photography at age 7, but you had memories going back earlier, you said to age 5. what’s the first thing you remember as being engaged in arts? : i don’t know. i mean i remember being 5 and actually saying i want to be an artist, which is crazy. and then i changed that a bunch of times before i came back to it, but—i think i remember being at my grandparents’ house and making drawings or—i have vague memories of drawing and painting and stuff.  : i think when i went to college, i thought i was going to—i had originally signed up to joint major in social studies and this department called visual environmental studies, which is the weird [college 1] way of not saying they have an art department, but thinking that i’d become like a photo journalist or a war correspondent or something. but then the first thing they made you take for social studies was an economics course for a year with [professor 1] with a thousand people in a big lecture hall, and i didn’t totally agree with [professor 1]’s politics… and… but also the experience of being in this huge hall, and then i had this british photo professor who had been shown the door of his high school when he was sixteen. no education after that and somehow ends up a professor running this department. but he—he let me take his advanced photo class, and i was terrified, and he was sort of very intimidating at that point, and i was the only freshman he let in ‘cause you’re supposed to go through two other classes before you would get into his class and i was like “well i can already print color”, but i was—i think i was just—i had a couple advisors that basically i was terrified of, but they just kind of pushed me. it was like him and this other ‘80s conceptual artist that i worked with afterwards in college named [artist 1] and she was just—she was sort of incredibly hardcore in this way that like—they somehow let me do a sculpture thesis when i didn’t—i’d taken these like intermediate sculpture classes where they never actually taught you how to make anything stand up because it was sort of all conceptual or something, and so i had these ideas to make sculptures that i did not know how to make, and she came to my studio sort of a month in and was like—weirdly just got furious and was like “where are the sculptures?” i had her showing me how to leverage a drill to like drill a screw into a piece—into a 2x4—when i was 21, having grown up all around it. but then, 6 months later, i made a bunch of huge sculptures, so…but having people that were just sort of like no—kind of no excuses about it and really just her idea kind of like what—what was expected was completely different, and that i think changed it a lot. but i think i spent a lot of time being terrified basically and… : just have to do it. : i mean i think… i never saw stopping as an option. : i wasn’t terrified that i—like i don’t think i was terrified that i couldn’t do it, it was just that—it was sort of like i kind of felt like i had to, not because i didn’t want to, but it was like—like i was—both i was driven to do it, but that—and i’m a little bit competitive so i was like “no i can do it”. i’ve never not thought i can…i think this is actually—this is—i had to answer some question for this silly kids’ thing, and they were like “what’s your super power?” i’m like “i think it’s just that i—whether it’s true or not, i always believe that i can figure out how to do anything,” so with sculpture, most of what i learned technically i had to go back and teach myself ‘cause i didn’t necessarily learn it in school or i went to just these different programs in cal arts also was like a program that spent a lot of time working on critical ideas, but they really didn’t want to talk about how to make anything at all, and so figuring out most of my physical process stuff has been self-taught, but i think that’s actually kind of interesting—sort of like well, if i can do it, anyone can, it’s just a matter of investing the time in figuring out—but it hasn’t—i tend not to be afraid of using a new material if—or using a material in a different way—‘cause i feel like it can—like there’s a way to figure it out. sometimes i’ll do it the wrong way or i’ll look at books for months and that’s not sort of the right way to go about it, but… i did a piece where i figured out how to build—we built a wooden boat that was suspended in the middle of the room and like i’ve never built a boat before, much less really anything with hard wood or—and i just had all these wooden boat building books that this assistant that hard worked for an artist that did a lot of curved plywood.. i’m like “we’re not using plywood, we’re doing it like these old school ways or…” i don’t know. i guess generally feeling like i—i know it’s just a product of having to do it because i wanted to, or—i don’t know what’s taken me in that direction but i tend—i think i also, i realized pretty early that the artists that i respected, the way their work changed a lot over the course of their careers, and they weren’t wedded to keeping a consistent aesthetic, which is more financially in one’s favor as an artist that has worked functions commercially, but i guess i always felt like it was more interesting to keep evolving or i allow the ideas to develop, so often the materials change, the workbooks are radically different and i have to learn how to do something completely new, but it makes it interesting i think. : i think…i think there’s some accumulated knowledge across materials which comes from the intuition of knowing when it’s not working or kind of knowing when to keep going and when to kind of step back and try something new. but i think—and i think also knowing the balance—or getting a sense over time of the balance of like what someone can tell you vs. what—maybe you have to find someone that has done something before than can show you or how much of it’s tactile. but i think—like how much of it is reading instructions carefully and how much of it is—like with mold-making, it’s this process that if you make one little mistake along the way the whole thing… or like if i’m working with assistants, if they forget mold release on something or if they forget like the whole thing can stick together and never come back apart or…but there are all these steps but it’s just a—it’s actually a pretty rote process, but there are all these little tricks that you can learn along the way. so actually like in the studio, the group of people that over time have made molds with me, we collectively have gotten better and better, but i realize also having them watching someone else do it sometimes too, i’ll say—they’re like “are these keyholes okay?” and i’m like “they could be better” and like if i was doing it on my own, i might just let it go but having the feedback… intuitive vs. analytic though…i don’t—you can’t do it completely blind, and i tend to go—i’ve started to work a little more intuitively and a little less directly from like a lot of the work up until this point is used as historical reference, but i think for me it’s most interesting—i think the work is most powerful when it’s also emotional and people have some kind of present connection to that and it’s not just about the—it doesn’t stop with the reference, and so i think that’s where the intuitive comes into it in part, and i think i’m actually very conscious right now of trying to—maybe the reference is the structure that allows me to make the thing, but having the intuitive to kind of get beyond that seems really important.  : honestly sometimes it’s finding the space to be able to focus. like i try to do saturdays and sundays, i’ll try to draw in the mornings and not have productive time that’s supposed to be—unless i’m, which is often the case—but if i’m on a deadline, i try to have time that isn’t just making the thing that has to go out the door, and time that’s kind of like stepping back and looking at the—like what is this trying to do, what is this trying to say… like i just made a bunch of things in the studio that i thought would be finished and now they’re not and like well—i feel like actually it’s all wrong and like what i’ve been dying all week to find  the time and i haven’t found the time but i’m just like—i just kind of need to lie down and close my eyes and think about what i want it to look lie, or picture something that might be that i think is completely different than what’s here right now. i don’t—and i can’t actually do that and i’m very aware as i’m driving around because i'm about to leave for six weeks i’ve had to kind of get a bunch of concrete things done, but i need this time for the show at—the show in the very large space i was telling you about which was at [museum 4]. i went out for a week and spent—the space was as empty as it’ll ever be, and i actually just spent a couple days walking through ‘cause i’d drawn all these—the form’s gonna be sort of maze-like, and i kind of mapped it just walking through the space thinking about kind of how much you wanna turn, followed myself with twine and then re-measured the twine points and mapped that back into the architectural model, ‘cause i actually see it much better spatially than if i tried to draw it, it’s not actually the proportions that i want it to be, so… but now i’m trying to go back in the model to build on that, i’m like “it’s much harder for me to work in the model than the…” but if i’m in the space i can say “no it needs to be that—like that high” or “can we stand—” we had the lift so i had the guy take me up at different heights to see kind of like where—at what point do you get vertigo? in the middle of the room vs. against the wall?  : i don’t know what i would do if i didn’t do it. but i think—i feel like i have a different position than a lot of artists in doing it in the fact that there is something that i—i'm interested in presenting a different possibility for what is possible, not only in terms of just what art can be, but what a sort of—some idea of modeling kind of human experience or how we can interface with the world or politics, social structure…but i think somehow giving someone engaged to the work the idea something could be different seems very important and i don’t know—the work doesn’t—its not necessarily designed for a mass audience, but thinking about people having very powerful experiences in an intimate way seems still worth doing…and less—maybe less interest in the quantity of people but the quality of experience and thinking about that as also as a model for other people to consider.  : i guess—so it’s interesting ‘cause i think about it both in terms of like how individuals have made an impact but—the question of whether any one person’s actions—it’s that sort of question of history that’s like these great men the theory of great men but it’s interesting ‘cause i've done a lot of projects looking at often somewhat problematic kind of, umm…narcissistic male figures like [historian 1] who discovered troy but wanted to prove that homer’s iliad was true, just kind of a magnificent but strange thing to want to do ‘cause it’s an epic poem…umm or nero working on a project looking at nero’s golden house and thinking about—like i thought about—i was doing some work for like [curator 1] for a while so thinking about—thinking about them as people that have materialized these fantastical realities that are sort of…that i think what’s interesting about them is that they—there was this sort of will to materialize their own desire, which i think is not necessarily negative that there are all these other problematic aspects around them but thinking about like—like i'm pretty strong-willed i think, and thinking about kind of like what—how different wills shape the world and sort of—i think asking—opening up the question and kind of asking people to think about—like also just thinking—when i was in high school i was kind of a punk and so i was into like anarchist politics and things like that…and i think generally thinking about the idea…yeah the idea of change—the idea that—like for example, like in the present system that people—some people i know don’t vote ‘cause they’re like “oh, well it doesn’t matter because, you know, the whole system is rigged” or something like that. “i'm just not gonna participate” or “i’ll only vote for this candidate that i don’t like because that’s, you know, that person is electable” or something. both of those things have always bothered me but i think that in a larger sense of “i don’t like these clothes” but that’s easy so we kind of never accepted things like that and kind of wanna push the idea that it doesn’t have to be this way or something. : i wouldn’t firmly agree or disagree more as passive or not…i think like willingness to reshape something or to be proactive maybe… i guess it’s not—i think being critical is important, but critical not for the sake of being negative, but being constantly aware that it could be a different way or constantly willing to step back and scrap the whole thing. we’re talking about this… there’s this great artist named [artist 2] who committed suicide a number of years ago and he at one point when he was doing really well had like four different buildings of assistants working on all of this different work and he came in one day after he’d been doing work nonstop for months and said, “it’s not right. you gotta destroy all of it.” and some of us were like “in no other business would you do that, because it could’ve gone out into the world—it’s probably like hundreds of thousands of dollars—millions of thousands of dollars worth of work and no one else would have said it wasn’t good enough,” but for him…and i feel that way pretty often, like if it’s not right and it’s this totally subjective standard like it’s very different than a normal business situation when it’s good enough, which is interesting. : there’s this [artist 3] quote i really like which is “what about cathedrals? are they ever finished?” but i—done is really tricky for me ‘cause i have a lot of weird neuroticism about it—there’ll be a truck that is getting packed outside the studio full of an entire show is going into the truck and i can still see the truck and i’ll look around the street and like “i haven’t done anything. nothing has been done and there’s a huge amount of stuff that just moved.” but also for me i think i’m less—i’m a total perfectionist in some ways but in other ways i almost—the reason i could never be an architect is i would always leave one thing left open, like there’s just a little bit of irresolution in something. and so i tend—the bronzes i just did, those feel—actually the curator that i work with came in with this really great comment which not everyone would take as a compliment which i did and was like “it still looks unfinished” and what was nice is that the process is evident i think and leaving that—the idea that it was made sort of open and revealing that—it’s less like it’s closed and doesn’t share that aspect of its existence or something. done is like a really tricky thing. : i wouldn’t say it’s entirely conscious but it just sort of happens.  : maybe it still leaves me the opportunity to be able to change it again. : i think it—i mean i think it’s kind of intuitive—there is a weird thing that happens with the paper maché works that i’ll work with an assistant to like build up the volume just ‘cause it takes a long time to get it enough to be semi-permanent, permanent-ish. but to get any of the detail, i just have to keep doing it and i cannot tell you how long it will take. i just know that they look terrible and they look embarrassing until suddenly they look like a totally different thing—and with a lot of the things i make actually it’s funny ‘cause a lot of artists post very actively what they’re doing on instagram, you don’t wanna look at it at all until it’s at this point but it’s actually really—look at that! and it’s funny but i kind of have to go through that—i’ve done it enough times that i know that it will get there or that it can get there, but in the middle of doing that, no one else could understand that.  : it’s very important. when i first started teaching, i wasn’t 100% sure about it but i think because teachers—like mentors have been so important to me, but i think also just in the kind of work that i make and the kind of way that i want people to think about engagement, it seems like it’s kind of part of the process, but for me also i’m gonna teach a sculpture course next year that’s gonna a look a lot at trial and error and just the process of what i talked about earlier—like what if you decided to make—work with this material that you’ve never touched before, like how do you figure out how to do it and working in a department where the students don’t have a lot of physical training and so getting people not to be afraid of doing that, sort of like that “teach a person to fish” model. but i think—i think also there’s a way that teaching sort of keeps you honest or something or that people—the students will say really blunt things about our work that like your colleagues at an opening might have taken for granted that this artist is successful in a certain way, so they might say something kind of bitchy about them but they won’t question the work in the same blunt way that a student will just like…and sometimes you kind of have to negotiate with the student, “well actually this might have value in this other way, we’ll talk about it”. but i think also having to go back in and look at the texts i’m teaching, like “well this is something that came from [professor 1] when i was in graduate school” and “should there be—that was this many years ago—6 years ago or something—should i update this,” you know, and also figure out where—where someone who’s 19 is at ‘cause i’m no longer 19. it’s interesting.  : it varies. it used to be very, very little, sort of frighteningly little and i have… : in college, i would actually do an hour a night five days a week and then—and then five and five on the weekends and that was… i did that for months. i can’t do that, but then i used to do kind of…  : nope, that was later.  : but then i was at like five hours and when i’m on deadline i’ll start waking up…or i used to work through the night and then that flipped and i started getting up really early and i was sleeping like five or six hours a night but then occasionally taking a nap in the afternoon, but that in the last year or two, i’ve just discovered that—or the deadlines are slightly longer so i’ve been getting more sleep and it actually helps. shocking. horribly embarrassing. so like seven hours now. seven, maybe eight sometimes. and i just heard something that was comforting on the radio that was about how it’s actually—the whole thing, cleaning your brain and all this brain chemistry stuff that’s actually really good for you. i’m very protective of my brain in like a weird way… : i don’t know. but the sleep stuff… : well the sleep thing, i was always really depends where it was like there are all these great stories like buckminster fuller only slept a couple hours a night or all these different… : yeah. but i think also i started—i had a couple years when i was living in my studio and doing show after show—well i was doing the [museum 4] show—but i was doing—i was like flying out of [airport 1] every other week and doing all these—way more than i should have been doing given how much help i had or lack of help and was getting sick all the time so i started going to the gym and i started sleeping a little more and i think that—like i’ve started exercising a lot to deal with stress and that actually helped quite a lot just because it’s actually less…less the stress of the production ‘cause i feel like that i can completely handle…something that can really drive me crazy i can get obsessive about it but—and a little bit stressed when we’re approaching shipping and it’s not where it needs to be, but more like the weird career stuff gets…or like dealing with cash flow stuff becomes all of this extra negative energy. so the exercise is kind of like a weird way to deal with that. and also i wasn’t sleeping so that was the other thing. i was getting up a lot in the middle of the night so if i exercise it helps me. somehow it calms me down enough that i have to sleep. : more or less, yeah. just get up very early. : between 5 and 7, depending on what i’m doing. i guess for normal people, that’s not that early but… : i get the best work done like right when i get to the studio, and i really love being there, being at the studio doing something before 8 is the best. but in the late afternoon my brain turns into a potato and i have to take a break. in the night i’m okay too. i’m okay like after 8, there’s like another round that i can do, but it’s that probably like 4:30-7 i’m like completely useless. : 4:30-7. yeah i’m like a—some other animal. i don’t know. it’s terrible. : no i think just—i get neurotic about time, be like “i should be working all the time” kind of always had like hang-ups about like labor.... but then part of justifying taking the time to exercise was actually like “well it’s actually good for your mental health as well.” and i think also diet-wise i try to be careful about vitamins and everything else and things that are neurologically good. i’m not—i’ve never been a—i drink alcohol, but i’ve never been a drug user ‘cause i’ve always been sort of terrified, like i was depressed when i was a kid. so i always kind of avoided anything that seemed like it would affect my serotonin, so that’s always been an excuse. : i probably shouldn’t take it, but i take b-12 for energy when i’m low energy and then i was vegetarian also for 9 years, so took that… : no, not veggie anymore. no. but.. : i wasn’t getting enough protein, actually part of why i started eating fish was the things that are good for you—can’t remember what it is but there’s something neurologically supposed to be really good for you, so i eat a lot of fish. : and i’m from [region 1], so… : [region 1]… : …so… grew up fishing.  : the lobster is actually a pacific lobster because i wanted it to be a certain scale. but i did grow up eating— : yeah but it’s a huge—it’s a three pound lobster, which if you eat it is not actually that delicious. but i wanted to pick one for the still life, so… : it’s a creature. : the crazy thing about that process is you can, with bronze you can actually do organic burnout, so what we actually did was put—just send the lobster itself, like i had to make a mold of the lobster…it was the lobster physically that got burned out of the shell. : it’s crazy. it works. : it’s cast bronze. usually with bronze you would make a wax positive of whatever you’re gonna do and they build up a shell over it, and they melt the wax out and pour the metal in. what they actually do is, with organic matter, the furnace is so hot they… yeah. : it’s heavy. it’s like… : it’s silver nitrate. it’s a thing that [artist 4] used a lot but it looks almost like pewter or silver depending on how you polish it or put it on.   : it’s crazy chemistry. the patina stuff is really interesting. : i mean i think for me i kind of put pretty much all of my energy into the work, and that seems most important. but i think i’m generally suspicious of the point, i think particularly given the current economy around that allows artists to do it full-time that in some ways i think promotes kind of the idea of branding and coming up with a thing that you can do and not straying too far from the thing ‘cause for me that feels very uncreative and it also feels like a lot of…some of that work will last but a lot of it won’t i think have like a major cultural impact. and i think for me i’m interested in continuing to invest huge amounts of energy making these some very monumental projects but then also creating a lot of smaller things along the way. but i think it’s less—and part of it is the way i was educated, coming out of [college 2]—but that it’s less about—they always would say “there’s a lot of stuff in the world, do you need to make more stuff?” or “if you’re gonna make—like there’s already way too much stuff in the world in the way if you’re going to add anything to it, like it better be something worth adding. so i think thinking about not only—‘cause i feel like it’s maybe i think even about—there are probably a bunch of ideas for things or half-made things that never actually go out and circulate that we sort of have already have discarded before they got to exist because it’s kind of like that thing wasn’t worth seeing or that thing isn’t worth hanging on the wall or taking up space in the world. or maybe it’s worth taking another week—like i could make 20 of these this week. but what is that—for me that isn’t going to advance the realm of what is the sort of creative output of…there’s a theorist named [theorist 1] that i’ve read a bunch that has a book called the [title 1]. he was a pre-columbian art historian but he talks about this idea that there’s this whole trajectory of the history of objects and some of them are—usually the original is lost and there are all these different versions of the original that we get but we only get a small fraction of what’s left. and a lot of it in some ways doesn’t matter, it’s just kind of these like echoes, but thinking about the thing that is the—i’m interested in the moments in history that kind of change the direction of something or the object that changes the thing. and so i think if it takes more maneuvering to get to that, i think i’m less interested in the quantity of things though it may take a huge quantity of attempts. :  there are things that come out as products more as groups of things, and the exhibitions tend to feel very full and labor-intensive. but i think that before—what often happens i spend a lot of time doing research or thinking or kind of too much time actually, trying to figure out what the thing is supposed to be and then it’s like “oh we are already behind on production. you should have started months ago” and so there’s like a manic drive into production, but at that point a lot of the conceptual decisions have been made so it’s kind of like a different kind of cycle. and then sometimes along the way, even when the other things—when i’m doing the research sometimes something else is being made, someone else is doing something that already conceptually exists or we’re making more of that other thing that has already been figured out. but i think the figuring out for me is really critical. : a lot of drawing, but not realistic sketching, but a lot of conceptual mapping, making lists. i spent a lot of time on jstor or read a lot, i’ll ask other people, like friends that are different types of intellectuals like thinking about this who should i read if i want in the financial system i’ll ask a friend who’s a phd in economics or… but i also have to do the thing sometimes where i make the rule where i have to put the books away or like no more reading… like you have to figure it out with what you have. so i’ve done that occasionally.  : it’s just a lot of those silly spider webs. and then i will go—like especially if i’m working on something architectural, like a lot of different sketches and not even worrying about them being anything that has to exist later on but just trying to kind of visualize mentally the thing and then put it on paper like i’m not a really talented drafts person especially but i just try to get something out there and they’re sort of very simple but with the conceptual maps, i kind of have to be of the right focus and mood to do it, but those if i can get a couple hours of that, that ends up usually being really productive.  : paper. i’m obsessed with the difference between things you can do on paper versus how your brain works differently typing and so i edit—if i have to write something, i usually edit it on paper and then enter the changes on the computer. a lot of trouble editing on the computer. i’m horrible that i—tree killer.  : i think in a weird way—i mean, i’m kind of an obsessive list-maker in terms of—like if i have a really productive physical production day, it usually involves a lot of lists and sometimes if there are more people working on it, there’s delegation but thinking about…i’m pretty good at structuring how something is gonna get done or how long certain things are gonna take. and i think a lot of—also like bit multitasking because i was very into multitasking and thinking about actually the best—i think the best work i can get done involves not multi—like if i can do things without interruption, i’m trying to structure the time in the studio so that email doesn’t suddenly come in that i feel—like i kind of try to only respond to email at certain times so that i can have the focused—kind of stay in that state where you don’t forget the one thing that’ll mess something up, so i think a lot of it—it’s almost, for me a lot of it’s like creating the space. it almost—it actually weirdly feels like an athletic state or something, like i think my breathing is even different if i’m just casting or something and totally focused, and a lot of it there’s a lot of timing involved so i’ll—i even often count rather than use a timer, like the plaster i use is a three-minute mix. so i count to 180 and…but knowing that i have to be focused enough not to get distracted to lose count is actually really specific, but trying to move…when i’m doing physical production, there is this very specific velocity that being uninterrupted is really beneficial to stay in that… it’s almost meditative, but it’s very fast-moving and continual and kind of going between…and also interlocking tasks because certain things have dry times, or certain things have set times, and so knowing this cycle of when this thing can come out takes about 30 minutes, so while that’s curing this other thing should happen that…and thinking about schedules that kind of work like that but trying to create this work flow, and if there are multiple people involved, figuring out their work flows around it. but also figuring out their work flows in a way that doesn’t disrupt mine…i enjoy managing people, but also figuring out a way that i can structure it so that it’s like, here’s the plan, “let’s start and everyone just go” until someone hits a problem, but that movement is actually really important i think. : and in the performances, i tend not stop it. so that’s actually maybe interesting for you. with the performances pieces i do, and they’re all event based, i think about being sort of the architect of the situation but not a film director, and so if something unexpected happens or someone has a strange reaction or drops it or something that i didn’t anticipate happens, i just let it all play out, even if it’s something that seems incredibly disruptive or it’s gonna drive me crazy, i just let it...that’s sort of a part of the architecture and i can’t—i don’t intervene. : there was a performance that started at midnight at the [place 1] and it was supposed to go until dawn, and at dawn there was supposed to be this beautiful, ambient music that came up with the dawn that these two musicians had planned. and the girlfriend of one of the musicians got incredibly drunk and was squawking really loudly over what’s supposed to be this kind of really transcendent moment and i was so tired at the time and i was looking at her and i’m like “i don’t think this woman particularly likes me and the only thing that i can think from where i’m sitting is if i get up, that is also disruptive, the only thing i can imagine is throwing a shoe at her and that is also not okay, so i’m just gonna have to sit here and let it play out” or people have had different pieces that have been conversational, one that was about irrational fear and someone freaked out in the middle and said “all of my fears are rational, i’ve had friends go crazy, i’ve had friends die of cancer, like all of this has happened it’s not irrational at all,” but i think that’s actually interesting. but letting—in a lot of ways i’m a control freak about things, but when something starts…and i know from watching [artist 5] work, [artist 5] gets in and moves stuff and people around to get the thing a certain way and i—it’s almost like watching a movie in a weird way, like i don’t even have to push myself to sit i just... once it starts, it’s almost like at that point i’m done, and it’s a personal rule. it’s very strange, but it’s like i can’t change it—like at that point for me it’s done, so i can’t change it, even though it’s happening… : i think it’s—it’s somewhere in between. i think a lot about the idea of not getting too comfortable and kind of changing, like if you settle into this rhythm where you’re making… it’s just like outputting something without being too conscious or critical of what it is. like i try to do something to change that up, like “this is good, this is fine”…like i don’t like to…something’s wrong usually. and i try to change whatever habit is whether it’s like okay, you could keep making a hundred more of these things but actually step back and look at them and maybe you aren’t allowed to make any more until you figure out something different about them or trying to—like if i’m getting buried in research and getting nowhere, then i have to put it away. i try to change the game all the time in a way so that it doesn’t—i mean to a point, not in the middle of we’re production casting something that’s gonna ship next week, like “no we can’t do this anymore!” like no, that actually does have to get done. but thinking about—i think there is this sort of total freedom and that—it’s actually really impossible to create in that state ‘cause i think for me i need the backbone of something or the structure of like, in the past for me, a lot of it’s been historic reference or research and using that to build an architecture upon. i hear there’s an idea of some sculptors that could walk into a studio and just paint something pink, i can’t do that at all.  like i need a reason to know why this pink? why paint it all? where did that pink come from? what are all of the other possible meanings of that pink? i’m precise or specific about things and i think also being willing to have an unorthodoxed relationship to time and deadlines is also part of that, like thinking about—it’s not like it gets done whenever, whatever, but sort of like defining your own structures of how long something can or should take. but i think—in a way it’s also like sometimes trying to trick yourself, and i think about it in terms of…i don’t remember exactly how this goes…i guess you sometimes worry about like with personal relationships if i’m like…oh this is good because you’ll be happier and that will be good for the work  but then i know it’s back in the service of the work that’s such a horrible instrumentalizing thing for it. so i don’t know—thinking about these ways of creating structure i think maybe. there’s a—i’m trying to remember—a composer that composed “bolero” has a concerto for the left hand that would be very difficult to play with both hands and it’s played just with the left hand, and i saw that performed recently and—[artist 6]—and thinking about that sometimes that—what do you see when you’re blindfolded or what—i’ve actually done a number of pieces where the participants are blindfolded but thinking about all the stuff that that opens up actually. so that’s maybe like a good metaphor for it.   : well the logic—i think the logic with almost everything or it’s—it’s okay to spend an hour at the gym being healthier and not injure your back when you’re bronze casting which will allow you over the long term to make more sculptures or something or it’ll be better for your long-term emotional health which is therefore good for the work to do this but it’s very difficult for me to separate to just actually be able to say out loud that something would be okay if it wasn’t good for the—i don’t think i can say anything is okay if it was not good for the work. so it’s like this insatiable beast. : there’s always that logical little bit in the back of my head, and i think it’s…i know it’s unhealthy… : well i think the break is healthy, but at some point being able to just allow that to exist— : yeah. everything in the service of the work.bilder: so something in your mind that’s keeping that…you have to do it for the work. it’s all for the work. : yeah. it’s terrible. but i’m aware that it’s… : no, not at this point. i think at some point i might have. but at this point if the work is not going anywhere, i mean certain opportunities may or may not, but i don’t think that—that’s kind of it’s own…at this point it’s a different set of problems in a way. so i don’t know. : i mean i think—i don’t know why this is, but i feel like for me, sometimes i feel like it’s frustrating because i watch other people work and i’m like “it’s so easy for you” or “you can put something out so much faster than i can” or like i feel like it’s only good when i’m almost—when kind of everything is into it and that actually does… i think the work is better, but i think also out in the world the work is just better when there’s this…and the work is in some ways about this…in some ways about these things that are “epic” or monumental or these things that are all-or-nothing in a way and that it always feels like it needs to be this sort of all-in investment, sort of like all of your energy—pushing the limit of that thing, and that’s kind of so much a part of it. and i never—there are people i know that are—do quite well having a similar day to office hours and then kind of going home and that’s…maybe do something in the evening and that’s it and it’s like i don’t—i do much better when i’m working longer hours and just kind of completely buried in it. i don’t know, i think also having—i think that mentally, there’s some kind of weird…like i don’t believe in stopping somehow or believe in pushing things to this kind of beyond a normal position, i guess. i don’t know what—i don’t totally know what it is, but there’s a depth that it needs for me that it’s kind of a lot. and i need to be in there with it. but i think also in terms of scale, i never—i tried—had people that were supportive like the first gallery i worked with in la that were supportive of me working at a scale that economically didn’t make a lot of sense necessarily and i never let that be the—the economics around what i do are ridiculous and i just kind of keep going in spite of it, in a way, and try to make the most out of the least on some level and thinking about how to continue to resist this sort of expectation of “this is an appropriate scale thing for this” or like “there is this opportunity with this budget” it’s like well how can we maximize what can come out of that as opposed to doing something that’s kind of like…i’m not ever using the appropriate scale of things, which kind of—like at some points has practically stretched everything too thin and caused all kinds of structural and logistical problems, but i guess it feels worth it or has always felt worth it even if…and i hope at some point maybe it balances out a little better, but i think the imbalance in some ways has been productive, and that’s—that’s a complicated thing to live in that, i think, but i don’t know. it’s very nietzschean or something. i don’t know. : i have two answers. the first would be that i probably always am most proud of the thing i’ve done most recently because generally i work project to project and in my profession, some people would call that working serially, so i’ll start a project, i’ll execute ten to twenty paintings over the course of six months, and then i’ll move on to a new series of paintings. usually at that time, i’m most proud of the new, whatever i moved on to, or whatever is relevant today. that said, if i look back, i started a project in 2012-2013 that was a longer term project and it was a remake of a classic, one of the first films ever made called [film name 1], which was an [studio company] commissioned film directed by [director 1] and i think it was 1904 or 1906 was the original film, but i started remaking the film because i became really interested in the idea of remake and the criteria upon which one needs to follow to be a remake and how lax i could be with that criteria. long story short, my work for awhile now has been very interested in sets of rules and breaking those sets of rules. and also the work i’ve kind of been fixating on very recently is the word misunderstanding, particularly interested in misunderstanding things. so i started that project and that project in its finished form will consist of 15 parts, one part relating to every scene of the original film, so i’m kind of remaking the film scene by scene and the way i’m remaking it isn't always cinematically. so i started with scene 3 in 2012 and i did it in 3 kind of takes or 3 iterations and each iteration was shown in a different exhibition around [city 1] and then the third iteration was then reshown in [city 2] in 2014. and i think that’s, to date, even though i’ve only completed the first part and i’ve begun working on the second part, or part 2 of 15 rather, i’ve been working on it for a couple of years, but it’s very slow.  i think as a project that’s probably the thing i’m most proud of because it’s the largest and most ambitious. and it’s also something i’m honestly not entirely certain that i will ever complete. : per scene, right. i’ll complete it as long as i don't get distracted.  : i do, yeah.  : well i think there are aspects of it that i don't think have ever been done. or at least... haven't been done in the way that i want to do them. i mean i'm not entirely sure that i’ve ever questioned why i was doing it other than because it was something that i have to do, and then once i started it, by starting things i trick myself into finishing them, and part of the way i work is kind of breaking things down into simple tasks as a way to trick myself into completing them. i’ll complete a set of ten tasks and if that set of ten is a part of another set of ten, which is a part of another set of ten, and it can grow exponentially like that, it feels very manageable versus if i were to set out tomorrow to complete this fifteen part project from start to finish, there’s no way i would do it.
 : i mean i see other people doing it, so i don't think i would say that’s a special talent, i would say that that’s a learned strategy. i don't think it’s inherent because i haven't always been like that. but it’s definitely something i learned. : ya, probably working for other artists taught me that. : ya, i worked for this artist who would make these drawings that would take incredible amounts of time to complete, and they weren't that big but they were probably four by five feet. by nature of their process, they would take myself and a couple other people... three to six months to complete, and the way that we worked was sectionally. like you work on a five by five inch section per week until the thing is finished, and while i’m not entirely sure that if you worked in a way that wasn't modular, that was spread out, in other words, i’m going to work over here and then i’m going to work over here, i think you would probably get the thing done in the exact same amount of time. but i think that would, for me personally, just drive me insane, like if i worked that way, that scattered, i already feel like i spend most of my day in the studio walking around not really doing anything but like "oh i was supposed to grab this from over there" and then i get distracted and do something else. so i feel like i learned how to focus from working for artists that worked with such method and so systematically.  
 : i mean i think that kind of opening and closing, or opening and narrowing is just happening constantly for me, like if i sit for too long and engage with large concepts, large ideas... in a kind of nebulous way, i start to go a little bit crazy. like it's too... or i'll just fall asleep. the further i get away from what’s happening here right now and what i’m physically doing, my hand is physically on this table, i think the closer i get to dark places or bad stuff. i try not to daydream, i daydream all the time. i’m not a depressed person, but i can get very depressed and when i start thinking about these big ideas and big things and all of the stuff that’s happening in the world and like is when i feel like i start to – well i'll get depressed and i begin to feel like i've lost control and i begin to seek usually negative outlets to make me feel like i am in control. so i try to keep things pretty focused. that said, i allow myself to kind of expand, but i always bring it back and i will never end on the expansion. i’ll end on the focus.
 : i mean i’ve used various ones at various times, but i mean i think the one i have the most experience with would be alcohol and drugs, which allowed me to be comfortable in that big, open space. and feel like i had control in that big open space when in fact at least the way i was using the alcohol and drugs, it was the opposite of control. but it at least allowed the anxiety to go away in those moments. so i’ve been sober for a few years now and in sobriety, the negative things that i use - i mean they change. it’s money, nicotine, sex, i mean i can use exercise in a negative way. you can give me anything and i can figure out a way to engage in that thing in an unhealthy way.   : he would probably kill me if i said his name : because i was told specifically don't ever tell people what i do, so i'm not gonna say. : but i did i work for this other artist, [artist name], who was one of my mentors at [university 1], who also worked in a very similar systematic way in which i work now.  and his entire practice is built on setting up dueling systems, and watching them both function and collapse. he’s an interesting artist. he just had a show at the  hammer a couple months ago. : so i worked on this project for two years, but kind of a few months before i even got to grad school and i worked on one project while i was in graduate school and i never finished the project and i was never happy with the project and i eventually i just kind of quit and discarded all the things i made under the umbrella of that project and that was really important in that i learned -  that was the first time i’ve ever given up on something and it was really important to kind of learn and know when to just stop and move on to something else, and recognize when something actually is a failure as an artwork and it will never be a success, and it was a hard lesson to learn and i had faculty in my studio for the last year i was in school telling me just move on to something else and i never listened, and finally i did. so that was huge for me because that kind of allowed me to, 60% of the things i make, maybe even higher, maybe 70% of the things i make never see the light of day and just get destroyed or repurposed, or a lot of the times they're just hidden in my studio now, but i don't consider them artwork and i should destroy them because if i were to die, they would be shown and i wouldn't be ok with that.  
 : i think in a large part it’s intuitive and i think that it’s based, on a large part it’s based on an aesthetic evaluation that i will use. i’ll look at the work and evaluate it aesthetically and that aesthetic is based on years of looking at things, and also it’s probably based on these kind of modernists notions of taste, which were definitely not in favor when i was an undergrad in early 2000s. i don't know where the stand now but the idea that some people have good taste and some people have bad taste seems so odd to me now, but that’s how i make these decisions is primarily based on whether or not, not to overly simplify, but the painting looks good. and in addition to that whether or not it fulfills certain conceptual criteria is that criteria relates to the content that i’m interested in putting out into the world. and again, i can only make that kind of decision based on my own subjective analysis of whatever it is i’m looking at, which more often than not boils down to a simple yes or a simple no. but the first thing that will disqualify a certain work is how it looks.  : i mean that concept or that content can be very vague at the beginning and often time i’ve found myself unable to articulate it. that’s not to say it’s not there, but the further and further along the kind of process of making the thing i get, it becomes more specific and by the end, by the time the work is ready to be shown, i can, in fact i have to be able to articulate what i think that content is.  i mean i’ve been working on these paintings for the last few months, some of which i just exhibited in a show in [city 2] a couple of weeks ago and when i started making these paintings i had no idea why i was making them. it was the first project i ever, first works i ever made this way, where i just started making them. the same exact thing happened that has happened before where the conceptual structure of the work was realized or solidified or tightened up as the process unfolded, except this time it just started from nowhere and is still in the process of tightening up. but there were aesthetic criteria that i wanted to fulfill, that i had in my head that i knew these works need to look like that so i’m going to make them look like that and use this subject matter, and then everything else fell in behind that. so it’s not quite working backwards, but a lot of times it can feel that way. i’ll make first and i'll figure out later, and hopefully that process is natural.   : well, that’s a huge question. i think fundamentally it’s all i can do at this point. i don't know if all i could ever do, but it’s all i do. i’m kind of constantly thinking about it. i don't think that ever really shuts off in my head. i’m not always making things, but i’m always thinking about making things, and i mean i'm sure if i was told i couldn't make it anymore, i would find something else that would satisfy me. i would hope i would but who knows, so there's that. there’s the fact that i think it’s the only thing i can do. a slightly more boring answer would be that well now it’s important because it’s my job and i’m making a living doing it so and it’s as important as anybody’s job is to them in that it provides them with food and shelter and all that stuff. but then i think the reason i started doing it was because, and one of the reasons i still do it, is because i think that visual art and music and film and writing is one of the few things that can change and touch individuals on a daily basis and it has agency to completely shift someone's experience in the world. and i don't think there are very many, actually i do think there are many things that do that because there are a lot of artists, writers, and musicians, dancer, and creative people, and i think that it’s interesting because i think it’s as important of an experience on a macro level as it is on a micro level. in other words, i think that if my painting could just change someone's experience for an hour after they see it, i think that is as important as it changing hundred thousand people’s experience for a year or changing someone’s mind about a certain political issue, social issue. i think those two experiences are just as important as one another. and i don't think that kind of event or occurrence is matched in anything else outside the creative fields.  : no i don’t, i mean i used to think that you had to know, that if you wanted to be responsible, you had to know, but i would honestly be quite content and quite happy with knowing that the change had occurred in either direction. i think a lot of my work has political subject matter or at least subject matter that is based in a contemporary culture or contemporary events and i definitely know where i stand on a lot of these events and issues, and for awhile i really cared that the people that were seeing the work also stood on that side. but now i think i would actually prefer if they didn’t, i would prefer if they stood on the other side, and i think it’s as valid if not more valid experience to have people that hate my work as it is to have people that love it because that represents not the same type of change but a very similar operation. so all that said back to that question, it’s largely out of my control to what’s going to happen, peoples experiences with my work, and i have no idea because i can't, i don't know what your experience earlier today, it’s like all we can do is attempt to kind of explain what i feel, and how these things made me feel, but it’s a far cry from how i actually felt and it always will be. : aside from my parents, my mother was an artist, but she gave up. she studied art in school but she gave it up after school and got a job and she had to make a living and the she had me. and she kind of goes back to it now here and there, but she’s definitely a creative person. there were a couple artists in the town that i grew up in who taught at one of the colleges that was nearby.  this artist who passed away a few years ago, [artist 1], was an early, well he was the first artist i ever met. he was the kind of example for awhile and i was fortunate enough to grow up in a college town, so there were artists around, there were writers, there were musicians, and my parents were pretty liberal so they kind of hung around those people so i was exposed to a lot of that stuff. so [musician name], and then there was one of my dad’s students was another artist, this ceramic artist, [artist name], so those were two really kind of crucial figures.. they were the two people that were like no you should go to art school, you should go do this. i mean i specifically remember [musician name] telling me go to [university 1], you'll live in a barn, you'll start a band, you'll drop acid every week it'll be great.  : he was right, that sounds amazing. that sound like college to me. so those were the first two. then at [university 1], like i mentioned [artist 1], and there was another artist, [artist name 2], who was there, who was another [university 2] person too, but they were very influential and all of these people i am still in contact with in some form or another. so martin and then, the interesting thing about the art world is that it can seem so big when you're kind of on the outside of it, but from the inside, it’s actually very small, so being in [city 1], if you're mobile and can get around the city, you can really get to these lectures and you can meet these people, your heroes and talk to your heroes. you can do that within a lot of things, music might be a little tough if your heroes are super, super famous. so then [university 2], i’m got along ok with the people in my department, but there was a painter, [artist 2], at [university 2], i found a lot of inspiration from him and a lot of direction and guidance from him. i think that would bring me up to where i am now, and now it’s like... i feel like i’m inspired all the time by people and those people change.  : all of those artists are heroes to me. growing up, my hero was cal ripken jr. because i was really into baseball and my cousin sent me a text message the other day because it was the anniversary of him breaking lou gehrig’s record and i remembered that and i was like that’s actually amazing.  somebody that shows up and does something, so he’s still actually a hero of mine, who i try to model at least parts of my behavior after.   : i try to, when it’s the season, i do. the fortunate thing is i can dictate when the season starts and when the season stops. when i’m engaged in a project, i’m there everyday. when i’m not engaged in a project, i’m not there everyday.  the answer is kind of yes and no, but i would say that i was there monday to wednesday, 7:30 in the morning to 7 or 8.  last night i was there until 10:30, so i show up for that stuff. : no, and that would be not true. so the artist that will remain nameless, who i worked for, he was the cal ripken. every six days a week, 8 o'clock in the morning to 6 o clock at night in the studio, brought breakfast, brought lunch, left for dinner, 365 days a year. it was insane.  : it’s important. honestly, i haven't thought much about that because i don't teach, but i do have people that work for me and it’s really important for me to be more kind to them than some of my previous bosses were to me. even if my previous bosses were very generous and kind to me, to actually be better than that. because a lot of the artist assisting jobs were pretty terrible. you’re making someone else’s work for them. you're getting paid pretty much nothing to do it. you’re being asked to be creative and you’re not getting any of the credit.  it’s brutal. it’s a very odd system, so i try to be conscious of that. not to be crude about it, but i try not to be a dick.   : creatively, i don't know. there’s a huge difference in how the work is received. sitting on my couch at home, i have a wall. i have a bunch of artwork installed and i think there are 8 or 9 works on this wall and there are 7 works by female artists and 1 by a male artist. i never thought about that, well i did once, but i don't think there’s any actual difference in the actual work that is being made, but there is a huge difference in how that work is received. in other words, i think that female artists make much less money than male artists and i think that they're shown less, they're fewer female artists showing in the major galleries, there are fewer female artists showing in the less major galleries. even though there are more female artists than male artist, they are less represented in the art world. i don't have an answer to why that is because the majority of dealers are female. i think there are a lot of female curators. there are a lot of female writers and theorists and art historians. so i think to some degree we are all complacent in that. i’m definitely conscious of it because i think subconsciously i bought all of this work by female artists in large part because i was trying to support artists that weren’t being supported. the few times i’ve curated shows, they've been all female artists. i never thought of them as such and i never been like here’s a show of all woman artists. it’s unfortunate that it’s still like that. : um, i don’t know. i would say something that was said to me, which was the most important thing is that you keep making work, if this is what you want to do, you just keep making work. don't make things that you think will sell.  make what you want to make. those are the two biggest things and those are the two things that i think that no matter what level you get to, you have to keep reminding yourself of, or at least i have to keep reminding myself of because the moment i stop making what i want to make or the moment i make something for reasons that are kind of exterior to fulfilling the aesthetic criteria, like we spoke of earlier and fulfilling that aesthetic criteria and fulfilling some kind of conceptual criteria. if i’m trying to appease the market or appease a certain person, i think that those are not necessarily ignoble intentions, but i just think that they're the wrong intentions, and at the end of the day i need to be happy with what i’m making regardless of whether or not it's making me money or it's not making me money or regardless if whether anybody's going to see it or none’s going to see it. in that way, it needs to be autonomous.   : one of the reasons i started that [film name] project was so that i would never have to figure out what i would have to work on next because it was such a large project that i would always have something to work on. because i am terrified of not having anything to work on or like not having an idea or the idea of writer’s block. so that said, that kind of led me into thinking about the remake and the adaptation and i was instructed by a lot of artists who were either members of or products of a generation of artists in the 60s and 70s conceptual art movement where everything was systematic and the idea of what the work was more important than the actual work itself. in other words, someone like donald judd, i will submit these plans to the fabricators and they’ll get made, but this is what it’s going to look like. this is the red it’s going to be and if it’s not this red, you better sandblast it and paint it the red it’s supposed to be. so i was taught by that generation or generation influenced by them, so that systematic way of making was always on my mind and that said, i was less interested in creating these sets of rules myself or creating these instructions myself and more interested in finding them out in the world, preexisting and manipulating that. so, like the [film name] piece, all the work that i’ve made ever has had these kind of ready made subject matters or these ready made source materials, usually text based. by running those source materials through different processes, i arrive at different visual interpretations of those subject matters. so, to answer the question, i arrive at the next thing primarily by reading or by not reading actually. in an exhibition i had in january, these new, fairly large, six by eight foot paintings, there were about twelve of them in the exhibition, were these kind of text based paintings that were based on the [newspaper] and i feel like i started making the paintings, they were based on the [newspaper].  each painting used a different day’s front page of the [newspaper] and i copied all of the text from the front page of that particular day’s paper on to the surface of the canvas in watercolor pencil and it was washed out, but it was like very single piece of text, none of the images, and they way i kind of approached that project was that the front page was a set of instructions. if i abstract the language, the stories become these shapes, these shapes become these individual words, the words are no longer words that have meanings, they're these groupings of letters and the letters aren't actually letters, the letters are instructions to make marks. and so if i treat all of these letters as marks that need to be made, september 27th, all of these marks need to be made on the surface of this canvas and i’ll make the marks and that’s a painting. that’s the instructions to make a painting. and i came at that not by reading the [newspaper], but by not reading the [newspaper] and seeing the accumulating pile of [newspaper] accumulate on my front door step and realizing wow i’m wasting so much money subscribing to this paper and not reading it. i wonder what i could do with these, is there anything i can do with this? i’ve never thought about it, but it was like how can i make myself feel better, cuz i feel kind of shitty and i feel guilty about wasting all of these papers and then that got me interested in thinking about oh that’s actually interesting that the daily newspaper is no longer this utility that we all have access to, at least that paper, home delivery of the [newspaper] on the west coast. that’s a luxury item. and if i were to go to a coffee shop and read the [newspaper], that’s making a statement if there ever was one. it’s an accessory, so it’s interesting and it got me thinking about the value of news, the value of print journalism, how today’s newspaper is incredibly valuable, but today’s newspaper tomorrow is lining for the hamster cage or whatever. so that was really interesting and i was like ok how do i give a different kind of value to the content of the newspaper or to the content of the news. i can make these painting based on it. it gives it value in a different economy. the newspaper has been a very commonly used artifact, material, reference, image of artwork in the last 180 years and i started looking at that. i started researching that and i was like wow from surrealist collage to post war american abstract painting to late 50s, early 60s experimental film. the list just goes on and on and on. that said, everybody was always using the actual physical material itself as in using it for the grounds of a canvas and painting over it or using it in collage or shooting it in photographs and i was like ok but how do i use the content of the newspaper. so that started that project and so that wasn't really about reading. that was about guilt. i felt guilty about something, but i did something about it. what i’m working on now is just an extension of that so my hope is that these projects become focused enough and then back to this idea of expanding, getting bigger and then getting smaller. they get focused enough to where that will lead to the next thing. and so now i’m on to different types of news sources, pictorial news sources, satirical news sources, which tend to be predominantly imaged based and not text based. same operation, completely different results, but it came from this other thing.
 : i do think that’s really interesting and i was actually thinking about it the other day because i’ve been rereading the david foster wallace book, infinite jest, and while he wrote a lot of other material, that’s on a different level than his other fiction at least. i have such mixed feelings about the idea and the word genius and what it means and how it relates to practice, which is the word artists tend to use, writers tend to use. i wonder with somebody like picasso, if like i couldn't look at 10,000 paintings and be like no, those two. that’s it and i think a lot of people, particularly people in the auction world would tell you yes they could do that. they will find you the two that should sell for the most amount of money. i make a lot of work. i’m constantly making things and i mentioned that majority of those things never see the light of day... and part of that is that they’re not good enough to see the light of day, those things aren't good enough to see the light of day based on my own sets of criteria but another part of that is entirely economic. if i release too much work, it will dilute my market. you see this thing happening where an artist will get very hot all of a sudden, like a young artist, young male painter will get particularly hot in a certain moment, make a lot of paintings because they're all selling, make a big pile of money, but then the paintings start to hit the secondary market in a few years and they won't sell for the same amount of money they originally sold for and it’s pretty much over at that point. you career unfortunately is done and that’s really sad to witness and it happens way too much and i think one of the way of preventing that from happening is limiting the number of things i release out to the world. so that’s one of the main reasons why i do it and i also believe in making less stuff because one of things i always respected about a lot of these 1960s and 70s conceptual artists is that in the 1960s, these people were saying there’s already enough stuff in the world, why do you need to make more of it. the amount of stuff in the world has grown exponentially since 1970 and i’m more inclined to favor the idea of i waited until i was sixty to make these five things here. hopefully, they’re amazing. that said, this is my job and i need to make a living, so i need to sell stuff, so i do. so i try to find a balance of those two things. : i write things down on scraps of paper and leave them around the studio. i try to remember things. i think i have a really terrible memory like i can't remember phone numbers. i mean i find myself using notes in my iphone all the time. i do take a lot of notes. i take a lot of scribbly notes. one of the reasons i make so much stuff is because every idea that i have i end up making into a work. so i have the opportunity to kind of sit with that idea, look at the idea, change the idea, and getting rid of the idea, which usually ends up happening.  i’m constantly making things to externalize those ideas and help me remember them. because generally when i do keep a sketchbook, when i look through it like the ideas from eighteen months ago, even from six months ago, i’m like these are terrible. at least textually or linguistically, that’s just a horrible idea and i would never do that. i tend to not do that so much or like not take notes in that way. because i haven't found the value in being able to go back and look at how misinformed i was, how ignorant i was, how naive i was, how immature i was.  and i know a lot of people say you should keep a journal because you're really going to want to go back and experience. i haven't found the virtue of that yet . i still sort of do it sometimes but it hasn't been that helpful for me. what is helpful is going into my studio and going into my storage racks and pulling out work that i made five years ago. that’s actually a better signifier of my state of mind and what i was thinking five years ago, than how i felt on tuesday december 4th. : i’m definitely more inhibited than uninhibited and i tend to keep thinking about things until i get so frustrated by thinking about them that i just take action. sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn’t. i can just think something in a circle indefinitely and i think that represents a lot of inhibitions and a lot of reluctance to do something, to complete something, to take into action. i honestly don't know how to release those kind of things. i mean i used to drink and take drugs to release those things and it didn't really work. i mean it worked, but the creative decisions i made were terrible. they were just bad. unfortunately, my inhibitions were probably so low in those moments too where i didn't recognize them as being that. i think inhibitions are great, like i think that’s part of figuring things out. that said, i want to be able to trust my instincts. : oh totally. i know a lot of people ask me about like how do you tap into that and i was like how it's, i mean i was also brought up in family of artists too so its always been there so, i don’t know if i get some kind of channel going in my brain or it's like it's just part of what i do, part of what of what i am. also, i notice that my husband, he didn’t have a family or ours one person, he's nuts like i mean he does amazing work and he didn’t come from a background like that, so that’s kind of another.... you don't have to come from a family of artists in order to be an artist and that was something unusual i haven't seen before i was like what? : um, yeah my both sides my mom and dad's yeah both sides of the family. my dad's side it was engineers, so we're engineers and artists mainly like lock keyed and all that kind of stuff and uh it was even lay-workers and all sorts of stuff so there's that’s definitely in there and.... but my grandmother was at disney and was an ink and paint girl for a long time and then on the other side they were illustrators um like for different, you know departments, stores and all sorts of things like that so they were involved in a lot of packaging in the 40s. oh ,at the worlds fair they did puppeteering, went to the art institute of chicago... yeah.  : of these things? um, seeing grandpa with puppets. the puppets were in the house and he actually sculpted some of them, of him and my grandmother. and then my other side, the disney grandma, she would always do drawing games with me like who do where you roll the dice and then you'd have to draw a body, foot whoever draws the whole bug first basically wins. so, i just remember that her pencil line was amazing like and she did ink and paint so gorgeous and i always wanted to figure out how she did that so i just kept practicing thought it was so beautiful  . : what age? i really can't remember i mean it's been ever since i was born. i'm always coloring books and drawing every summer was drawing with my sister and drawing people tattoos in high school then it just kind of progressively went into keep on going. so yeah... it's as far as i can remember my first recollection of drawing i think was like i was 5 i think, i mean maybe i put that memory there, but i.... i’m pretty sure that i remember drawing in some coloring books and making my own like bringing tails off of critters in stuff in coloring books and make my own. : adding tails, adding ears, coloring, you know, coloring outside the lines... that whole thing. trying to color inside the lines and realizing i liked coloring on the outside so... : coloring outside the lines...  : yeah... uh oh. : wow! i have to say honestly the last couple of years have been amazing. i've been doing a lot of stuff with [company 1] and i have a toy line coming line coming out. i'm the first independent artist that they have allowed to do a series, like a production series... their toys like my version of making it, you know, that kind of stuff. so, they are calling it artist series 1 and i am first one doing it i'm really proud of that and just these one of a kind pieces that i've created. sculptures... and i'd always been a 2d artist and then all of a sudden five years ago, whoosh, something happened and well more than something happened i actually had to leave my job and [company 2] because i was a little too headstrong. yeah and so i got my guitar and i left you know... so it was uh long story, um, but there was a turning point. i was doing storyboards and stuff that was in a regular position at the animation studios like character design storyboarding and me and the director, that’s kind of his sick thing.. he liked me in a weird way and i was like forget this i'm leaving and i left. but, it was actually one of the best things that happened to me, me and my husband just got married and it just had a complete turnaround for me. i started picking up clay and i wanted to explore something else that would make me really happy because i think i had a bad memory with kind of being whipped in the studios. there were some really good times, don’t get me wrong. there's like good stuff about animation. i still do it today, but its definitely you have who you jive with when you do those kinds of things, especially the bigger cartoons you're with each other a lot. long hours, lot of pencil time. : so, you got a find people you really like and jive with. like bands, you know music bands some groups like radiohead, you're like oh those are great, really know... they really know each other always hope for a good team. : um, pretty much on my own but when i do stuff with [company 1] i do work well with the team, as long as its not too much input on my work. i do have to be honest, i do get a little bit fussy about that, whereas it's my work then i want to make it my way. and um, but when my husband and i collaborate on these big sculptures like once every two years - we just finished one last week - and um, he's the one person that i can actually... will work in tandem and then all of the sudden something comes out. and it's really rare that we work together, but when we do, something really cool happens... so. : kind of a new development. : i know yay! : he's been a great support. : um actually... not yet, but as of next month - i've got a pitch next month -  and yeah normally it's been like [company 2] and [company 3] and [company 4]. other companies that where i... they send me designs and go through their designs and just turn them in and sometimes it doesn't involve my characters. sometimes it's nice to just draw somebody else's idea... you know get a paycheck in for while that's steady instead of farming after it. sometimes, you get a little weary and need a change of pace every now and then, yeah. : yeah... they... there's a lot of happy campers over there. one of my friends, [friend 1], he's a friend of mine and he does storyboard for them. and some people he just really jives with and they keep the brain happy over there where they're not just cracking the whip on you. some studios do and it takes the creativity out of it and then you see the artists unhappy and you get kind of unhappy. pardon my french, you know, it's kind of what crappy : what salted language... show him my may west dress.  : kind of both. i call them art explosions, actually. like i had to label it because people were like you didn’t do anything for 4 days and then all of a sudden bam! the paintings done on friday and i just like i have to sit down with it almost until its completed and then, you know, i can go back a little bit, but i have to get the bones, i have to get the meat and potatoes happenen', otherwise i just feel i didn't make a good piece. my work tends to be, like from a painting one of my sculptures faces i have to finish it off all at once because if go back in... it's just not as fluid. so, i call them art explosions because they almost have to rest a little bit. i sketch a little bit, but i don’t harp on the idea too much because they i feel like i lose the spontaneity of it, just for my work anyway. its really weird. : yeah. : yeah... i've pretty much sat like a whole day you know take some breaks. but, sometimes i've started like at 3 and i'll go until like 2 in the morning and the painting will be done. and i'll have to take a break or two, but like i almost have to keep going, like chasing after it. gotta get that color... i knew what color i was mixing so i have to keep... its in the palette its already its mixed up, and so it's kind of a energy thing for me  : um... well oh man. i just kind of know. sometimes you can screw it up and then you go oh no! um, paint over it... i don’t know i think in the beginning it was harder for me to know that it was finished... um, but as i create through my adult career, it's... i can say you know it's loose enough it's tight enough... just let it be... let that stork live and don’t what are you going to do fuss with it until its ohh once you realize what kind of painter you are if you're impressionistic if you are a there's a surrealistic movement nowadays where its really tight all the gradations are there and its gorgeous but i realize i'm not that kind of painter s you realize what type of finish you want and in your head goes okay that where you're at this is how far can you push it. but there is something in there that i don't quite understand until you or stop my husband goes stop! if you're lucky, but normally its me by myself. : that is interesting! um, yeah. on some of the pieces that i've worked on, i could hear my... i was talking to myself.  just let it go, you know what you're doing, your head knows... and then all of a sudden i just sit there and trust myself and once i tell myself to trust myself, then it comes out right. if i harp on it too much or try too hard, you can just kill it. so, there is definitely amount of... i guess letting go a lot, but a lot of trust involved with yourself and um yeah. when i do my ink lines, a lot of it... i have to just commit and go okay yeah, let it go, but then also keep learning so that you're lines do get better and you if ah i didn’t get that one... you think i'll get it next time. keep trying kind of thing... um that makes sense but i definitely have told myself to trust myself many occasions to let it go and not sing an elsa or anything for ya, but... if you have kids... but uh yeah, i'm sure you know that song... : but uh yeah like you do have to let it go and discipline yourself to keep learning otherwise you just kind of start going into old patterns and then your work doesn’t grow. so that's something that i find that’s kind of a push me, pull me all the time. constantly, what do you want to learn and do you want to learn to paint? do you want to keep this style and explore within it or do you plan to render things more? there's a lot of choices involved and it does kind of conflicted in there, for me anyway, how far to go.  : um, it comes back to trusting myself again. what really feels good in my gut, for lack of a scientific way of thinking, but i mean, part of me just feels if right here it's okay, let it go, let it be. it's done. it's living. it's alive. and, um, some people... i've seen who are there's just this red flower little flourishes and that’s it and they are done and i totally respect it when they can say now what that’s done like ah that's cool. good for you! it takes a lot of guts to say somethings finished. a new lid til' hell freezes over... really good so i've done that quite a few times too. : i do do comps. i do comps for [company 1] because they need to see them up front, but a lot of times i would just start and another person that does that i think is [artist 3]. he did a lot of stuff for... oh [show of artist 3] and he's been doing tons of books [artist 4] for years and he just starts from an eye and he'll just go, and then all of a sudden there's this man running through the woods with a beast and, you know, and all starting form this eye. i don’t know how he does it, but yeah, i have to kind of get it together to see what i'm going to do. sometimes i will take tracing paper and do another version, but sometimes i find that i'll lose the fluidity in the paintings if i do that too much, so i have to watch myself. : yeah. it'll stay in there for a while. actually, just came back from [city 1] and i went to a place where that was really inspiring to me, but i didn’t paint anything about it yet. but, it was so incredibly inspiring, i know something is going to come out, but i just don’t know when. so, i think it will attach itself to a particular body of work that i'm doing, like um... sometimes it sparks... it's another spark where there's like five pieces i wanted to create this year and had nothing to do with [company 1] or any of that kind of stuff and so there's this whole backlog of awesome visuals that i've been collecting and then it will find its way into the pieces when i least expect it... yeah. : yeah  : yeah, cataloged almost. oh, that collar was cool but that hat that automaton was amazing or type of leaves that were around the sculpture or something those will definitely come back in find their way into a piece of something. : i think its operates on its own. sometimes, there's a little like oh i like that and then it'll be in my sketchbook or something and i will put things down. um, you know, in black and white, but um, some of the most beautiful pieces i feel just kind of came out. : um, sometimes. sometimes i can see where things come from. um, i did some inks while i was over there and those were directly, you know, from [city 1's country ] like oh little chicken women, but then all of a sudden all these dunce caps were coming up and i'm like what's going on there? i don’t know where that came from. sometimes i really don’t know what's going on. i don’t know where it comes from. but, yeah... but there's definitely a catalog of things that get mushed together depending on what the project is. : oh my goodness, yeah. there's so many... writers um... to bring up my husband again he's been a huge supporter champion of my art for so long and um, i mean, you know my mom, my dad, my grandmother was an artist. everybody just always had a neat little doodle or something to say. some of my writer friends are the most inspiring right now because they're helping me tap into um... some bigger ideas. so, um, a lot of my cartoonist friends, they're so involved in their work where they're at where it doesn’t get down to like a fine art artsy fartsy level where we're thinking much, sitting in our little black outfits, figuring out art. but, sometimes it's just like deadline aaah figure it out, you know. and um... so a lot of my cartoonist friends, we don’t go that route, but some of my fine art friends, like my friend [cartoonist 1] and my friend [cartoonist 2], they tend to do really bizarre, cerebral, surreal paintings and um... seeing what they look at was really interesting. they really need to look at a lot of books and things like that. and me, i like to go out and experience it more. so that’s where we're different and so i've seen... my husband will just sit and like rock for like 2 hours and um, then he'll think of this idea and do something so... everybody's different... um how they channel it. um, did i answer your question?  : i love your chair award. : oh, i bet they do! well congratulations, that's pretty cool. anything miniature totally grabs my attention right off the bat. : is that actually welded to it? : shiva head... : it's all linked somehow... : doing all of these studies... all hippie on ya and start carrying around smoking vases.  :  like that’s happening, starting to happen now. a lot of people have been asking for classes and been wanting to help, learn how to create. i actually taught at this place called uh... it was called festival 1] and it was very cool up in [state of festival 1]. tons of teachers, they fly in tons of teachers, and i was really nervous because i don't normally teach. i teach little kids, not adults, so i was like little kids they are silly like i am and adults really wanted answers. i was like oh no. what do you mean you want real answers? but um... they were great. so i don’t know, i think i definitely need to do somethings that's happening now. i feel like there's a point in my career where i've... you know like things are just going along and just got to keep positive and keep creating and then i do definitely have to do some workshops and connect with people that want to learn right now because i've been getting so many emails about it and i need to do it. so, it's in there. the little spark is in there. i kind of haven't acted on it yet. : i'm really excited to just sound like a kid. i mean, i'm so happy that i didn't give up on my ability, even when it got really hard. sometimes i didn’t wanted to draw because i burned myself out from working on a job or something like that and so there were times that i felt like i'll give up, but i didn’t. i kept going and so, um, it's really exciting that i feel like that anybody would... when they're so excited about art and stories that just gives me hope for mankind. seeing all these crazy conventions... you've seen it its insane. but they're all really excited about stories and art. gives me hope, makes me happy. : umm... let's see... you know, it used to play a better part, and then i started doing more commercial stuff and then recently i've been like i'm actually going to write another story book. i've written a children's book a while ago and then, uh, it kind of went out and then i was just doing imagery it was mainly spot character stories. this person lives here and she's got these friends. and then it comes together in that painting, and then after um... let's see... i'm losing my train of thought. i have sos syndrome. it's the shiny object syndrome i told you... so i see like squirrel, oh my god! haha. but um... so anyway, now that i've lost my train of thought. it's all the testing... sorry my brain's a little fried. : yeah! i thought it takes endurance man... : yes, story and narrative. : yeah totally. it’s a whole world. i mean, my stuff in particular... i know different artists work differently, but um all of my little critters can hang out together, whether they're little... i mean tend to have more fantasy inspired stuff where littles can talk and little ladies ride birds and all of these things and i would like to go there. a lot of times it’s the place i would like to be or um... with the [company 1] stuff, it's as simple as like i'd like to wear that outfit, you know, it gets kind of base  on that. but um, as far as my own work, yeah. i mean, it's all apart of a world and with some of the cartoons that i've written and pitched and i... my husband and i did one at [company 2] and that story um, was really cool, what it created... little submarine, little girl and her bear, scottish man friend, and what do they do together? are they all supporting one another? is one ill? you know, it kind of spawns more characters, so even if they're not all in the same story it’s a part of the world in my head.  : virtual worlds... i mean i played a lot with dolls so i guess i did. i'd always take them camping, be some kind of chaos that would happen... ooh there's a flood and squirt them with a hose you know. um... casinos... you know, me and my sister barbie casinos. but we definitely had stories to go with it all... like all little kids playing... okay well we're going to have this and then this chaos happens and everyone's okay... so uh, i miss playing. i miss my dolls haha. : yeah totally. it does. i've always wanted to make things run smoothly. that’s kind of a part of my head that kind of contradicts the other one. there's kind of like a little fight in there, um, because one is very logical and it is all business oriented and then the other one is like i want to run free! let my hair fly! and so those two sides definitely fight a little bit, but then there's the engineering part and i think that’s where they get along because then i can create things, um figure out how to assemble, uh figure... i think that’s where sculpture came into it. like that was missing in my life. i needed to be able to create something and have be warned, there it is, the engineer side has lights in it and um that was something i didn’t think i could do, so i think the engineering part... my dad got me a saw when i was in high school, so - the scroll saws – so, i was always into tools and figuring out how to use tools and my husband helps with that too. he likes knowing i can make something out of nothing engineering. so, engineering it work. i still need a lot of help with that, but i'm doing okay. i try. : oh yeah. i'm totally crafty. i couldn’t just draw. i wish i could. i honestly wanted to work in animation for the rest of my life and just have it be that’s where i go. that’s my job. you get a paycheck... i was like ah. the way i am just didn’t work out that way and i kind of had to get a machete out and find a path find i didn’t know was there. : i have to say it was when i left [company 2] . i was like ohh [weeping] no, my voice just cracked, i'm not going to cry. hahaha. but, i had to stand up to my boss actually. i've always been a kind-hearted person. my mom was always like, "treat others you want to be treated," and um you know i... there was actually there was some sexism in there and it was really hard and then he attacked my drawing skills and everything and brought me in and was going to have me canned and... what?! you know, and it was all because i was getting married and so it was really tricky. yeah and then i was like, i looked at him and this moment happened where i was like you know its okay i'm going to go. and he looked at me like, "wait no you're on probation, i don't want you to leave!" and i was like, "no, its okay it's time to go." and for me to say that was a really big moment for me because i was always like "okay captain, yes sir." and then after that i really have to think for myself  and so this is just like a "sorry sir, i'm leaving" and my world just... i was like phoenix rising stuff. i was completely crumbled and i felt terrible about my art skill and i thought i was... and everyone was saying you're doing a great job you've done it for a year, what happened? oh, you know, boy girl stuff. i don’t blame him today. i'm fine. but, um, it was just sad that it had to turn out that way ,but in a way it needed to happen so i could go off and do other things that and be strong. actually feel like i can do it... i can do this. just gotta ask now, talk to people. so yeah, it was kind of traumatizing, yeah. : yeah, yeah. i think i needed to happen. i honestly love being friendly with everybody. my heart loves it, but also knows that when somethings wrong or when its impacting... honestly if it's impacting my art or my family you know then the brass knuckles come on like no! this is wrong. this is not the way it's supposed to be, so now i'll speak up so much more than i used to and um... but yeah, it kind of  was like a breakthrough that happened and crashed down and then build back up. : crazy : yeah, i'm always trying to put myself of some kind of schedule but failing. like, it makes everyone around me nuts, but i go in and out of schedules honestly. sometimes it's like... schedule, i got this, get up and do this... and i have some friends 9-5 they do it. paint 9-5... wow. and that’s the art explosion thing i was telling you about. it's great and its terrible all at the same time. so, there's some stuff that i'm working through right now on how to balance my life, you know, where i can both i'm just like okay set aside time where art isn't taking over your brain or something like that... you got to go get the sponge, get sponge out soak up some more inspiration. that’s something i feel like a lot of artists battle with it because you can play too much and then you're totally starving or you start to get too businessesy and then you lose that fun little median, so then that's a constant...um little battle. try not to think of it as a battle, a yin and a yang and i got to keep the pie the same shape and have fun and then you do it... you know because art's fun, but then it's also discipline. and, sometimes it's like just pure bliss and others times you know i hate it...get out outside, i don’t even want to see it! just like having another boyfriend, i swear. so, i don’t know, but that's kind of what i can equate it to.  : oh yeah, right now the balance, there's soo much - i'm a little off balance because so much is... i'm happy [company 1] is my work, but i also have to pull back. so, i'm going to be doing some stuff in [city 2] like oil painting just to go back to the art walks and i get to tell you about it... i'm painting a model in the last bookstore and everything and it's fun. i definitely have to balance those. even within art land, now there's commercial and there's the fine art even though it's my take on [company 1] stuff, it's still, you know, i have to answer to contracts things like that, so have to use a balance there too. it's like all little yin and yang symbols all within one another. have to keep them happy and swirling around one another, so.   : the little yin and yang... within the yin and yang... yeah i'll have to do some kind of like celtic, you know how they do those beautiful symbols like the book of kells like within one another where um where is this so much balance within balance within balance... keeping it good and keeping your hear t open to new things... and for some reason i'm getting chills. it's good. : oh, i'm sure it will. : i'm sending you guys stuff, so don’t worry. : oh right on : i won't even try! maybe later... : that sounds wonderful. : i hope i'm hitting all the points. i tend to like get all wispy about it sometimes, trying to stick to the questions. : yeah intuition... good to see that in a scan. there it is. : oh, i cant wait to see it. : the insula? really? : i'm all mushy today... i don't know...maybe it's because i combated a fear of going into the mri... i did! so much! it's really cool, honestly i am so into the brain. i know nothing about it except for high school and college classes, so i'm really excited about hearing about that there's actually places in the brain for all of these different things. : yeah, because sometimes it makes people feel crazy, sometimes. like when you're exploring something new and, it's almost just like kind of like jumping off into a pool where you're like well, i guess that will work, sure! but, it goes back to that trust thing again where a lot of artists have so much... mass amount of trust in what they're doing and freeness in what it is, so... yeah/ : yeah, sometimes that pops in there. especially when you've put a lot of, you know, work towards a show. some of my friends do... they do a lot more fine art. big shows where they put a year and a half worth of time into a show and they let it out there and i used to do more solo shows like that. not as much. and i swear my heart goes out to them because my friend [cartoonist 1] who moved... she went to [country 2] and she painted for a year and she came back and did a show and i... it's just, you know, just hide and then show all this bring your heart out on a little plate. so, yeah. it takes a lot of guts. she actually had a quote that she wanted to send to you to share. it's, um... it was dead on. i can't remember it right, but i think i will send it because it really hit on the how there's so much unexplored territory and how you just have to trust in your head in what you're doing. it's not always easy but keep going. she nailed it... i didn’t send it to you, hahaha. : no : what do you mean by that? : on and off but not really my - i mean i'm trying to, i want to, yes.  : yeah i'm trying to. i'm working on it.  : of course. i want to my mind just goes on and on without its like it doesn’t have boundaries. i mean not that i'm wild in life, i contain myself when i make my work that's like locking myself in but the mind itself it just drifts and drifts and drifts forever. : i think that’s more and more so but like in time but i think so i think i was born that way and it’s the environment helps create all in that it's like a full package of things but i don’t know maybe that’s the way my brain thinks doesn't mean it's true. :  well i don’t really. but i think that sometimes i do, yeah. you know what's been helping should i say everything? i mean/ : okay, that's okay with me, yes. : yeah, i mean should i just be open and say everything like an open book? : you already look astonished. -laughs- (someone gives the participant something) oh thank you so much. you are so sweet.  : oh wow. that’s great. i like that  : well i might just be very ordinary but i'll just say it. what's happening is that because i feel like my life is really a tangle, so i started to do a twelve step program on the phone only, like a place that you call and i got a sponsor, and she was telling me to get on my knees and to pray to some higher power and ask take my mind off, away from me and take care of that mind. what happens is i’ve been praying at night to do that like usually the prayers don't work, but i got on my knees, and said, "please god, take that away from me." because the mind goes crazy and doesn’t stop. i’ve been able to fall asleep much more than before, it’s like letting go. : oh, it’s like a race. it doesn't even want to go to sleep. my own mind doesn't want to. it gets really energized at night.  : well i mean you know i've had the craziest different patterns they have nothing to do - they’re so different from each other, but i have been able to since the prayer - i mean i wake up at night, but i’m able to sort of just relax and go back to sleep in the last week. but before i wasn't able to. it doesn’t stop. : it’s very exhausting. like zombie, little bit. : i think so, i think so. but i was able to sleep a little better, but i was also that way yeah. i mean it’s not even, it changes and then i get sleep and then i don’t. but it’s very - it's a huge part of like hard to sleep, yeah. : i was born in [country 1]. when i was a year old my parents moved to [continent 1] to [country 2] and i lived there for almost nine years and then they moved back to [country 1] (for 2.5 years) and then i moved to america. : like two and a half years. : but then i moved to [country 1] when i was nineteen or twenty for three years and then i came to [city 2] and then i moved to [city 3] - after two or three years i moved to [city 3] for five years and then from there i moved to [city 4] for ten years and then i went to [city 3] for eight months and now i’m here for the last few months. i'm back here. : -laughs- thank you. i'm lucky to be here. : you know, honestly, i don’t know. i think i know, but i might be wrong. so, i don't want to direct the test in a certain way, but i'll just say what my mind thinks. i think that things are in the blood, they're in your dna. i feel that, and i think that um, because i come from - okay like my parents are born in [country 3], both of them. they're [ethnicity 1], but they had i think they're very shaky - from so much trauma they didn't know it themselves and there was no - nobody knew how to read or write so i think we used a different area of the brain or something. and they were also very - they were traumatized and they passed some of the trauma to me. and um, i don't know maybe i’m talking like this because i'm comparing myself because we only see the outside. that’s how we are always relative, right. i think so. so, um, i think that um, i mean i don't - i erased a lot of parts of my childhood. i was very disassociated. i think like i - so that’s family but i think that um, i was always - i look at pictures when i was a little girl and i was very dreamy. like i wasn't in this world, i was always like somewhere else. i think that living in [continent 1], i had a lot of freedom to walk around and play with things, and i didn’t have parents that stimulated my intellect and told me oh school and read, none of that existed. they were just like - they were almost like, you know, there are like [ethnicity 2] from the middle east that were not educated. it was not even that much the love was really not, there was a twisted kind of love. very raw, i think, i think so, yeah. : i think it was sex- yes, for sure that part, and it was also like people who don’t know, who don’t have the skills and the tools and they’re wounded. it was like coming from the middle east, poverty, no education - you know my grandmother had my mom when she was fifteen, and there was just – and there was like arranged marriages. it’s another world. it’s a non-western world. so, they came to [country 1] when they were five years old and you know. so i guess they had other layers that happened to them, but the base, this is how my interpretation is.  : oh yeah, because i mean i think it was like the state of [country 1]. the [ethnicity 1] were going out and you know. that’s why. : they came…they moved in the 50s, so it was a few years after the state. : i mean…well, the grandparents didn’t, none of them did, and my grandmother didn’t know how to read or write, and even the men didn’t have that much either. just a little bit. i think so, but i don't know. yeah, and then, you know they - i think my mom was really came from a crazy home. nobody talks about it. it’s very, very…our family is very like we are so - all of us are like there's no - you're just surviving in a way, internally, without the communication part. so, i think that, um, i don’t even know if i’m even saying this is a product of psychology or what because i think that life is just is and we give it meaning sometime, so. i don’t want to influence, but it’s a story. it's like a story, right? everything. : all life is a story. : -laughs- it's exactly actively doing that, but who knows/ : yeah, exactly. it's just like, yeah. who knows what's true and what's not. : wow, that’s true. it’s like an invention that someone is looking through a little window and making different rule systems and saying this is what it is. : i created a piece for a very famous gallery that was like my dream to get in there and she never told me when the deadline was so it was three years of not knowing, but i built a whole story. i said, "oh my god this is my chance to be heard," so i spent three years, almost all my entire time as much as i could, not even having some of it not even having a studio. i would go to the street and like outside and just open a big um, piece of paper and paint and then i got a studio later, but i spent my entire life building a whole story. i think i might have pictures with me, but um, so i am very – i am proud of that piece. it’s a whole world that i painted. it’s like a painting installation. everything is made out of like stories and um, yeah. should i look and see if i even have it? : yeah this is it, but you can’t see the detail. yeah, it’s exactly that one. and i am proud of it because um, because i had a really strong intention when i did that and i was given the freedom to do whatever subject i wanted. i didn’t hold back. i wanted to have a scream in it. so i'm proud of that. i can say it’s the work of my life.  : yes, absolutely. yes. and it was a very satisfying and it required a certain type of energy that is almost on the back burner. it’s like cooking something forever, but i made small pieces. it’s like focusing every – it's like you only see small slices and small slices and i never saw the full piece because i didn’t have the big studio or a big space to see it, so created it only in fragments and fragments, and only when i got the space, i - it was realized, yeah.  : thank you. and i allowed myself to be very um, dark in my thoughts with that. like i wanted to intentionally intensify, like i wanted to bring the volume up as much as i could with what i had.  : thank you. : that’s a good question. you know i think that... i think that i have a spiritual - i grew up with a spiritual world i think. not that i studied spirituality, but i think that i have um - i don’t use it that much anymore, but i have a part of my imagination that gets really scared and terrified but it’s like - but its consumed with a dark side and it's um, like not sleeping, that’s pretty dark too, but i think - because you get into this crazy obsession and these energies that pull you in forever and ever and they consume you like they are feeding off you or something. so um... the question was? : well, the dark elements is one thing but also to make all this kind of labor intensive work is that you have to be very restrictive. i was restrictive with myself. i don’t socialize that much. i have like a tolerance to make myself do something for a long time even though my body wants to jump and wants to like run into other things. but i hold myself, even if i am about to fall asleep, i am just like just take your body and make it work - just move in motion. if you’re in this container, all you have to do is just be there and that’s all, not edit.  :  well, i guess what i mean is that, um, how do i... um, sorry i just - i'm running away from different things. : i feel safe like i say, "oh my god," like oh god – not always but that time it felt safe that i get to be with my – i get to be in this cocoon forever. yeah, and i get to meet the gods and i'm very satisfied with being here.  : when it’s out in the world?  : i’m very detached. it’s interesting. i have something about me that is very very detached. sometimes i don’t feel it, but someti- of course in the back of my mind, i want appreciation and love and you want people to really be affected by that and i think in the opening, not many people came because openings can be that way. it doesn’t matter how fancy. it depends, you know, it was the summer time and – but um, i’m not - it's like i look for peoples’ reactions, but at the same time there is a part of me that doesn’t care. it doesn’t matter really. i care like ten percent on the surface.  : because i don’t know if i know what else to do. that is one thing. and i just feel like, wow, i have to see what the biggest motivator…um it’s kind of spiritual it's almost like um... well it’s wanting to find god and wanting to step into other - to create other worlds and then - or to be able to be a magician. i’ve always wanted to be a magician. i didn't - not the fake magician, but i wanted to be a magic maker and i believe like i’ve had i think like maybe nature is full of you know magic…and i’m not talking about just the sur- like the magic um… i think maybe also living in [continent 1] or something or having something in my dna with my parents and like something archaic inside you know that's like pre-language or something like that. like caveman you know like i guess the art was like a ritual and it was like bringing the other world into this world and playing with like - being able to manipulate matter.  and i think that that drives me i think. so, i’m not always thinking that way, but i have this like this need, unconscious need, but i’m not really facing the need. i’m not saying i'm not embracing it, but i know that i, i’m very limited in life. i feel very limited. and i think i wasn’t given many other tools and i think this is the tool i know – had to have, i don't know, to be able to be fascinating. i wanted to be fascinating.  : really?  : sometimes i feel like i don’t know… i don't - but i want to.  : oh wow. thank you so much. it's very hard for me to believe that people think that way because i have a very – i have a screen that doesn't - i can hear what you say, but i don’t believe. i don’t give myself the permission it’s almost a very like a wolf that will walk forever alone. a cold almost. i feel - this is just words - i almost feel like there is a part of me inside that's almost like a serial killer, but it’s putting it in the - it’s transferring it into that and this is very true. not that i want to do it to people, but it’s that thing inside.  : but you know what i mean, right? it’s symbolic.  : it’s just symbolic.  : someone else’s probably.  : pre-moral? meaning that?  : because i don’t even know what pre-moral means. i forgot. : you just had to say that for the camera? : i don't. : i wouldn't even fight back if somebody - but i think i'm talking about this kind of um, something else that could parallel to it but it doesn’t manifest in people. it manifests in something - in this.  : yes. : and also murder. it’s almost like murder, too, in a weird way.  : you can't see – i wish i had - i'll see if i have the images. i think you have to see the detail because you wouldn't know what i'm talking about yeah : a what? : yeah, it’s a dead bird.  : yes, it’s a dead pigeon (looking through her work) but um, yeah i don't know if i – i thought i had it. i wish i did. hm. yeah.   : yes. : okay, and it’s recording me, right?  : okay. –laughs- you know, i’ll tell you one thing. when i – when we lived in [continent 1], i saw this women that she was um this - it was in my classroom or in kindergarten. she brought a drawing that she did. it was one of the boy’s mother and i was the drawing and it was the most magical thing i’ve ever seen. like i saw - and i think because i didn't have – it was [continent 1] and i didn’t have too many other things. it wasn’t today’s world, you know, and i saw this one drawing and i felt - i was so - it was of monkeys or something. maybe the drawing wasn’t so big, but it was so magical to me and i was so fascinated and it was all taking place just in my own secret world, not that i shared anything with anybody, but i was very fascinated by it and that’s it. i remember that experience, but then, um, when i was um, how do i say it... okay, when i was a teenager, you know i came from parents that didn’t talk to me about anything. they didn’t talk to me. when i was going through puberty, i didn’t even know what was going on with my body and i got my menstrual period, i was - before thirteen, a month before thirteen, and i didn’t um - i thought that my liver fell out. this is how bad it was. there was no one to talk to with my parents, nothing. it was like a few years of awful secrets and feeling shamed. it was like i was cursed. it was - all of it took place. something so natural was like insane. like ima- my whole brain started to be imaginative and i would look at people and i would imagine all of these women and i said is it possible? or if they are like that, i feel so sorry for like it was like - it just like - it was a whole, like a little tiny thing became a whole world of imagination filled with shame and weirdness and guilt and what i did when i was so sad and i wouldn't leave my room and i would stay in my bed paralyzed for a couple of days until everything goes away and disappeared and um, but i remember that i was so sad and i would lock myself in the bathroom and then i just decided, i had a piece of paper, and i recorded my face to record - and this is how i started to draw - i recorded my face, how sad it was or just as a record. i wanted to keep a record and i think this is - and if it relates to the question - but this is how it started, the drawing. and then i remember i um, i was/ : i was almost thirteen.  : yeah, i was like maybe was six or seven.  : i just recorded my face in the mirror. yeah. one time. um, and then like maybe during that year another thing that happened to me is that i, i saw this television show. really cheesy thing about how to paint and then by our house there was a store of oil paints and i asked my father to get me oil paints so he did and then i - little thing you know little kits with oil paints and i remember the first time. i never learned how to draw or anything like that and i just started to paint something and then i was like, "oh my god i wasn’t even here," and i said, "god made it for me. it wasn’t me. god made this." and i was like, "thank you god, thank you god," and i just was – you know, i thought that god made it. and i knew that i had magic. but i had to come fifty percent because afterwards when i wanted to do it, i couldn’t do it again because – i mean it was like i had to bring my fifty percent human to meet god or something and then i would look at pictures and try to draw from the pictures because i wasn’t one hundred percent god, it was just god happened in that moment.  : you know, god – because... i don’t know, i always had that. but i think it has to do with like judaism a little bit and always hearing oh god is going to punish you or god is in the background but i think even then it was mixed because maybe growing up in [continent 1] and then not having parents that plant intellect in your brain and what to - reading and concepts and you’re left with nature and wonder. i think there was wonder, a lot of wonder and understanding that maybe there is a higher power even though god was evil because of - but it wasn’t full. it is very, very layered. it’s very - it’s like a salad with different vegetables in it, so sometimes you go to that branch and that branch and that vegetable. yeah, according to what it feels like.  : i mean they were parents - they didn’t - they were people that don’t know. they didn’t know. like i said, it was very raw. they/ : oh, because my father was working construction you know? yeah, he’s a workaholic, so he works. and that’s good. he’s able - he was able to provide for the family and stuff like that.  : she wasn’t working then, i think because the women - because this was [continent 1] - so the company paid for you and the you didn’t have to work. the women were not working.  : she was at home, yeah, with her friends back then and people.  : no, she - her mother, she had an evil mother and she was traumatized and both of her parents i think - she doesn’t say anything to me - but it’s like i have to, i’m receiving information in other way to them. i think she’s really messed up. probably mentally.  : i do. a brother and a sister.  : younger. my brother is eight years younger and my sister is two years younger.  : yeah. he wasn’t born yet, my brother. yeah, back then. yeah.  : i did. we would always pick at each other and i mean i used to be mean to her when i was little. yeah.  : we never talk about those things, but i don’t think so.  : yeah, i need to say sorry one day, but she's - her mind is not there that way to even go there. she has children and stuff, but she is not - they don’t think the s- they don’t have the time, they don’t think like that dwelling and emotions and things like that. different…things… : she’s married. she has two children, but she’s not – it's not very happy inside at all. because she came to it very wounded and she married a person that is probably also wounded that way and cold, you know. but he does what he does. yeah…providing for her.  : um... : um... : yes, of course. : those are just like - right, right, right, it's true. um, well, one time when i was um, like a teenager, and i was - we were walking by this pla - i mean i was driving with my parents and there was pictures - like it was [art center 1]? do you know [art center 1]?: right, on [street 1]. yeah, i know the place. [street 2] : yes, and um, i saw those pictures there and i - i saw drawings and i said, "mom, mom, can we go? can we stop?" so, we stopped there and i wanted to take classes there but it was expensive for us. so, my mom talked to the guy or something and the manager - his name was [manager]? do you know [manager]? : okay, good. he was really a big. he was um, anyways i ended up take classes there. and what i did is i worked half- i would sharpen pencils for three hours and then i would draw there. but [manager] was – he - i couldn’t believe it because he brought everybody in to see my artwork and me who never even - i was a zero at home, i think, and then having him bring people to see my work and telling me that i am a true artist and all those things. it was like i don’t know. and maybe my imagination, maybe i’m exaggerating this, but he was really - he was fascinated by me and he didn’t - and i think i had a hard time. maybe i had an attitude in their eyes or something so i couldn’t - i was not - he sat down with me and he said oh you know people say you have this and that but i don’t know, but he let me have classes for free at the end. so, i took classes there. and he would - but i was very dysfunctional and i would not always come there and i would be very - i was very depressed, but i was there for a couple of years on and off and he just allowed me to come and take classes and he would sit down with me and tell me that i was a true artist, that my work was good and blah blah blah so that was really nice. and i think that i - i saw that he - that people liked it and i didn’t know why. but then, i knew that i could make magic. i knew that i was able to manipulate, so i enjoyed the manipulation of being able to project, to make things have power. yeah. so, that was a great experience for me.  : yeah, i was like a teenager.  : yes.  : i did. i do. i barely went to high school. you know, i also had very - home was not good or i was very depressed and i didn’t go to high school, but i did go to few times and there was a social worker there and she told me we have to get you out of the house. i never told her anything about the house but she's like - and i’m like what are you talking about and she’s like i’ve worked with people for years and i’m telling you we have to get you out of your environment. so she took me out and we went into group homes and different shelters to see - and i had resistance, but once i was there - it took time – but i was very happy. so she saved me that way. she took me out of the environment.  : i was fifteen and a half.  : yeah. and that's - i know it’s a little crazy, but i managed to - like that was - being away from my family that was - and then i experienced joy that i never had before. from being around ghetto people experience joy. it's really – i mean the places were very scary, but it safe for me. because it was like freedom again or something.  : i did. but you know, because all the colleges i went to i always chose a college that didn’t require me to do academics because i couldn’t do them. i didn’t have that face to do it. so, i went to places that i could just be left alone in a studio. yeah, and be as good as i could be.  : oh, thank you. : thank you. i also - i mean just to - i want to put it in there, i don’t know if it relates, but i had out of body experiences many times in my life. so, i have this kind of - i had this relationship with imagination and spirit world. it’s not so much now anymore, but yeah. so i just wanted to add that in there.  : i had one - you know, because i couldn’t sleep at night at all and what happens is that body gets really exhausted. and so what happens is the energy comes out because it wants to just be free or something from exhaustion. so, i had one when i was fifteen a really significant, crazy experience. : visions and leaving my body alone and see it - watch it sleep in bed and then stepping out of the house and picking out the grass and then being able to see that i can go anywhere i want. almost, it’s like tuning channels in and visiting different beings and different humans that existing in other dimensions. : maybe like 20 minutes, which is a long time. that one. when i was trying to tune in to people in real life, like real time, it wasn’t working. some of it was not working, but some of it was working. it depends on what - which… : i had few. yeah, i did. i had few of them. i have one story that i one time, in [country 1], i lost a ring in the ocean and it was really - i was deep inside the ocean where there was nobody there and you couldn’t even stand up on your legs. and my ring fell off and it was like fifteen minutes went by and i was like moving a little bit this way, but i felt like i never - like my ring was attached to me and there was an invisible string and then i dove inside and i dug inside and i picked up the ring. that’s like a very concrete proof of things like that. and then i also - i think - back to the not having a menstrual period, i didn’t have menstrual period afterwards for years and years and then the doctor gave me really pills that made me really sick and i remember i was like nineteen back then and he called my mother and told her to triple my - make my dosage bigger that we'll have to do it and i heard - i was half awake, half asleep and i heard that and then all of the sudden in the morning, i had an out of body experience like my energy left and then i went, i saw the stars, and i saw all of the milky way and i went really quickly into the star system and i knew telepathically that there was a woman with me and i was in a special place. and i said, "[pt name], you are in a special place, ask for something." and i asked for my menstrual period which i didn’t have for five years already. and then, there was - the woman poured a cup of very, very strong red tea and then she poured it in and then when i woke up - i forgot about the whole thing - but i went to the bathroom and i had my period after five years. but it was so real. it was like i went into um – yeah, it was a trance and i was out in the galaxies. yeah.  : no  : no, because…oh my gosh i’m so embarrassed to say it in front of the camera. can i say that? : no, i don’t mind saying it… but i feel like i’m revealing myself. i might not be liked afterwards –laughs- but i, you know – i receive social security so i don’t work. and i think i’m kind of scared to work and i’m scared to - i don’t know how to give that way with people. i don’t know how to be - it requires too much of me. i don’t know how to be socially skilled that way. i think i’m very self absorbed or self centered or just doesn't - don’t know how to do that. i don't like that energy. i get tired - i don’t like children either. i don’t like kids. it’s like too fake for me. contrived, yeah.  : well, you know, i can only talk about myself for a second and i can say that when i make my - i remember when i started to make my work, when i was a teenager, or sometimes maybe - but i knew that i was a different energy. i stepped into a very male - like i felt like there was another being inside of me or there was a male. like i remember i wasn’t the woman or the person that i think i am. i wasn’t who i was - i am. i could feel - and i realized one day, i said, "oh my god. you’re something else…there is something else inside." so, yeah. i remember those feelings. that is was almost a male as well as other things.  : how did i know when i felt that?  : because i wasn’t [pt name]. i wasn’t the limited person.  : i mean if i don’t find those photos with me, if you to, i can email you those detailed stuff.  : if you wanted to look at some imagery.  : it might be in like three emails because i don’t know to put it in one so you might have an image album –laughs-.  : is she famous? : i think i know who she – yeah. : oh wow. : oh wow. : yeah i'll look her up later. we studied her in art history, but i don’t remember everything. (phone ringing in background)   : oh my god that would be so good. : sure, i would love that.  : wow, that would be good. yeah, i know her work. it’s pretty great. she’s gay, right? and she was in [city 3]? : that’s fascinating. : to a lady, right?   : wow. : wow.  : so fascinating. oh my god. i don’t know what she looks like. is this how she looks like? : no that’s not her. :  i don’t know how she looks like. but that's her right? but those are all her? : oh : i see. she looks like she had a really tough life or something. yeah, like to do the self-cutting and self-injury and to have the subject matter like this requires a lot of tragedy.  : and her eyes, her eyes too…-laughs- : wow. : i'm not very engaged. : no, i just make it. i’m like a maker. i’m like somebody who doesn’t think too much. you just have to be in the moment and work with what you have. and so like i do look at imagery for references like i need to google something because i don’t know what something looks like, but i change it and i make it up, but i need to see how light hits things or what things could look like. but it’s like - my brain makes it into - it creates - it’s like, imagine you take a photograph and you start to do things you want to the photo, so it’s really kind of like that and you can change it, but it’s like a departure point.  : sometimes. : not really.  : oh, wow. let me see if i visualize... i mean the visualize happens in the process. so, it’s like it all happens in the process. not before.  : even if i have an idea, it’ll change within the next ten minutes. it wouldn’t - like it would just change because it’ll become something else.  : never. i can’t do that. but let’s say i paint something, i’ll have um - let’s say right now i put pomegranates in my work, but they happen to be little brain part – it's like part of the brain but it looks like pomegranate and i’ll have it repeating itself in different variations in the piece, just like music has you know. so that’s… : but not in the same way : never. i don’t make preparations or drafts or any of that. it’s just improvise. the whole thing, improvisation.  : i don’t know. i don't know. i just have my feelings and my moods. : i just follow. but, when i make something, my work is detailed. so, it’s not like i jump every second to something else, like there is a long time before you move into another thing. you have a lot of resting time.  : mhm, yeah, exactly, exactly. but i wish i would think more about what i do. i feel like i’m just a maker. i feel like if somebody gave me a piece of paper and i just tear it and do things with my energy and my hand wants to do, but i don’t - i wish i could see it from a - so i could make it better, to think about it. i wish i had another brain or other areas of my brain that were critical, not just in an emotional way, but really was able to look at it and see wait, that, you could do that. i wish i had that kind of thing going on.  : because then it could be better. it could be like somebody who could whisper to you what you need to do to make your work better. to even take it to a higher level.  : oh my god. for sure. i mean, according to life, like in nature, it’s infinite. and then they say that like we - consciousness keeps expanding and you create it, so why not create, you know, more potential. sorry for talking about it these terms.  : i’m totally out there.  : wow. interviewer: /but you know, i would have to say that you represent the side of coming from, you know, internal forces/: really internal forces. : oh really? he’s like really famous as well, wow…  : yes. : wow. : um…i did stuff with other people, but not like, not as a group, just like one other person and i brought who i am there. i wasn’t changing too much, i was just more of myself. i always stayed myself, though. well, i was collaborating with a person that our art didn’t have to do much with each other and that was a little bit annoying. one of my ex boyfriends, but i didn’t like his work – i don't know, it's different, yeah. : yeah, i think that um - yeah, i feel a lot that i am not very engaged sometimes with my work or i feel very detached or very sad. that my mind is not there. that i do things automatic. and then i only have moments of it every few weeks i'm like oh i see a spark and that keeps me going…yeah. : i think it’s because of the type of work that i do and it’s because the way my life - i don’t know the reason it is. maybe it has to do something with my life. but i’m coming into a point where i see that like other areas of my life are neglected and that it’s not balanced and fear, lots of fear comes in about the future or just not liking myself and things like that. i don’t know, but yeah. or sometimes the old things that used to work don’t always work the same way. it kept me going for a while, all of the gasoline that you have. yeah…  : i think going to see art shows. i mean, i don’t drive here so it’s very hard for me but years ago in new york when i would see art shows or go to openings, it makes me happy sometimes or feeling connected maybe to other people or something that helps. my studio mate which you meet probably, [person 2], she’s a really fascinating person, but um, we talked about my art yesterday for a little bit. just her being there with me and helping me sit down and recognize my imagery or talk or ask me questions. i felt like i was stepping into the gods that i - the world of the gods that i so want to create. like i had intimacy with my work again. like it felt like oh my god, i’m getting - but maybe it has something to do with psychology and childhood and being neglected and i’m bringing that baggage with myself, you know. maybe i’m all emotion. maybe i’m attached to the past too much. i don't know, yeah.  : yeah, they're all connected. : yeah. : hm, okay. : the testing can show stuff like that? : okay. that's nice. : wow. okay. : sure, yeah. : that's great. i would love to hear that. : i used to take dance classes for many years and i used to - it’s like, it's egyptian arabic belly dance but it’s very... more older, classical, because there are different types, but i took that in [city 3] where i lived for many years. and then, in [city 4], i took classes on and off, and i used to perform a little bit. but in [city 3], many, many years ago, i used to perform and i liked that because i was very lonely the entire - just making my work and feeling miserable inside and isolating and then when i went to perform, i was – i became - i felt like i was fulfilling a fantasy that i wasn’t. you know? i became glamorous and i liked that kind of glamour with all of the costumes and, you know, maybe the sexual fantasy projecting that kind of thing, you know, being able to make myself into a piece of art that - you know? it felt nice like the exercise. interviewer (1:06:13): there's that too. do you still do that?: i mean, i don’t drive here in [city 2], so i’m able - i don’t take classes because i don’t know where i can take them where i live.  : yeah, that’s true. i like things where i make my own rules, where i don’t have to go by the rules of reality and age and like not – just i can just be a fantasy but i can't really fully fantasize my - i kind of have wishful thinking that i can um, like pass matter, that i wouldn’t have to be bounded by this rule system of reality. yeah.  : really? i mean, it’s possible. people have done that, right? they broke what we call reality and rules.  : yeah? who do you know that's done this? : like completely. like all the rules. : physical rules. : yeah, maybe. or maybe somebody who is still here but can do that. : i like that idea, yeah –laughs-. interviewer (1:08:00): you're unique in many other ways... let me ask you a couple questions that are about special qualities that we think are associated with creative achievement. one of them is the quality generation. just getting a lot of stuff out. that's when we look to see what's the best predictor of creative achievement, it turns out who produces the most creative products, it turns out it's the people who produce the most products. so i'm just wondering, do you do a lot of work? do you generate a lot of stuff?: i really like that, yeah. i used to be that way and i am still that way, but i make it - like you saw - i make it into one world, but in that world there is a lot excess of things and it’s important to me to just keep doing that. it’s like a drive. it’s an unexplained drive that i must do that. i must do that. that is the only thing. yeah. : just keep going and going and going. and i can – i mean i told myself i mean i want to do this for the rest of my life, but i just need a little healthier mind and it doesn’t self-defeat me and kill me before i die, you know, before i supposed to die. but yeah, the production is very, very important.  : well, i don’t know when i’m done, but i know that i’m not satisfied. so, i don’t want to be satisfied either but i know that, that it just - you feel it - i feel it physically. it’s a physical sensation or like a guttural sensation that you're like wow, god is here. god is looking at me. now i can recognize god.  : now it’s ready to be in the world because god is like - has convinced me that it’s here. yeah.  : hm, that's fascinating. : well, i have to think  exactly what you mean or try or grab what you mean in my mind. you know, i wish - i’m not sure because i wish maybe that i had more intentional thoughts about that and i would do that more.  : but you can do that with elements. you can do that with materials. i don’t know. i mean, just the fact that you look at things in the world or you look at other art, there's many languages, so you bring the language that you like in and then you bring - you collect, you’re like a collector or memory and images. so that by itself is like a hybrid of many things. but it’s more - it’s not so analytical, it’s more coming from places of appreciation and wanting to own that yourself.  : i used to. i used to go look for little things, elements, that i wanted to be in my artwork, but i am very lazy now that i use google. or i used to always go and take photos and things, but i haven’t done this in years and it’s something that i kind of need to go back and be - i used to spend a lot of time hunting for materials in life, but i got a little lazy. or i’ve gotten comfortabler in a way that i am able to already not have to do all of that work so much but i don’t think i should still do that because it’s much more richer that way.   : sorry, when you say that to inhibit something that like to inhibit something that what? : wow. well i have my own way of doing it. and the way i do it is like i said, it’s almost like taking a photo and doing the things that you want. you’re already marking on something that exists, so this is how i do it. i would still maybe paint the circle, but i will add layers and layers to the circle and then i would um - but the circle would be there. with me, the circle is there. i think versus my roommate my studio-mate she is, she said that she can’t make the circle how it is, so she would just make it unsymmetric and change it. but for me, i wish i had that - i would like - i really admire her for that. i really like the results and what it comes out that’s she’s able to - and i think osmosisly, i’m a little bit less reliant on looking at photographs because i see - it gives me like five percent of more, little bit more freedom to play with the paint and let paint be. make its own thing. i used to have that, but it's like i went to a different branch and so she is there to kind of remind me of something that i, i don’t know, that i like.  : i love those questions. : yeah, when i started, i used to make a huge piece and finish it in few hours. and what happened, everything was immediate. there was an immediacy to it and an urgency and the experience was very like more intense, more spiritual and ritualistic. i think i was like a caveman. i brought the gods right away and i had - it was all very chemical. it felt very chemical. now, art school and the ideas of making, you know, wanting to make more masterpieces and wanting to refine that part of, you know, that learns how to refine things and makes it not raw anymore to the public. i mean i could paint raw subjects, but the, but the application and the energy and the state of mind - it’s a different state of mind. it’s something like you take a long drive for a long, long, long time. and then, -laughs- you know, it’s like the immediacy and the urgency is not there. it’s a little numb on the back burner and i miss that other parts before because it was like a force that entered you and possessed you and i very much miss that. because i think also art school and also you know when you get older, like before there was no future. there was - the concepts didn’t change about like, you know we build concepts in our mind and we become like more maybe relaxed and then life is like - we believe too much what is in the mind and we believe our thoughts, they become heavier and slower, slowing down but before it was urgency. maybe it's like – yeah. i miss that type of aggression that one might have when they are a teenager or like yeah, yeah.  : thank you so much. : wow you’ve perfected that name  : cheeks sent me high (both repeat and add another syllable to the last name) : yeah i understand : oh wow, yeah : yeah its funny, my boyfriend was actually doing the spelling he's going to be here he's also an artist. i actually meant to bring a collaborative book we worked on two years and i'll remind him to bring it when he comes in next week i think [person 1] is his name  : but yeah, why would i want to bring him up... oh [person 2] is our studio mate so the three of us are all together yeah : oh she was? aww that’s sweet : yeah we're pretty intense in there, we kind of give each other like a little ass-kicking. like critiques whether or not they're desired you know so  : yeah she's special : wow, what am i most proud of?... so funny like its i feel like what i'm most proud of and what i'm most happy i did i guess they're kind of similar to me i don’t even know if it has much to do with what i did, um i guess there's like a few things that are linked together that created like a meta event. but um in 2011 one of my paintings was on the cover of [art book], which is this book that comes out i think a few times a year and it actually became a big career door opener for me. like a lot of things happened, or i was starting to get contacted from people all over the world, and all of a sudden i was getting into shows and it made me realize that nothing about my work 4 years ago was that different but it was just like this moment. so that actually exposed me to [artist 1], do you know who he is? : or know of him. well he saw, he got the book and liked my work, he liked my story, which i'll probably get into later. he contacted me and actually bought a few paintings for the hospital he's building, the [hospital], where he has this whole idea of using creating a hospital that more of a museum. and then he actually invited me and then [person 1] because [person 1] and i started dating around that time that he invited me to go to [country 1] and do art with [country 2] refugees and hang out with him and all these other clowns that’s what he calls them but they are all artists and musicians and activists but we are all there so i would say i'm the most proud but i'd guess proud is maybe not the word i would use its more of a i'm proud of being on the cover of that book but it's all these other things that happened that i'm yeah : yeah, well it made me realize how much as an artist it's important for me to connect with people and i started like after 25, i turned 25 something happened which is like i cry almost 5 times a day and it's not like depression tears but it's like being moved tears yeah i know like i'll see a little squirrel and the way its eating its little nuts and it'll like i'll just be finishing my hike and i'll get teary eyed or like these really um. so i think what i discovered on that trip how important it is for me to feel close to people and you know art is just a way we connected, its just an instrument, a medium, it wasn’t really about the art it was about us being together and i think maybe what i had to bring was like an openness and a desire to feel close and i probably i feel like that’s why [artist 1] invited me to come and do this. aside from my own personal experience i was a refugee when i was a kid because i was born in [country 3], so he kind of felt that it might be interesting to bring an artist who had a similar experience as these kids so it was like a recycled. : it does actually  : yeah well i think it’s a combination of things, one is my mother who she was a single parent and i think the way she raised me and the way she exposed me to art when i grew up in [country 3] she would go to greece often and bring back books on greek mythology and i was really interested in medusa and all these monsters, things that you know typical girls are not you know like not barbies and i drew a lot and i painted and even the way she would talk to me was not about beauty it was about what is it, tell me more about it, so there was this i didn’t grow up thinking that art equals beauty. it was more like uh investigate it, go look into it, tear it open, what's inside and so when i went to grad school, i studied psychology and art at [college 1] for my undergrad and then i went at got my graduate degree at [college 2] i had a few teachers who exposed me to some writers who i really felt related to their ideas like [writer 1] i mentioned as one, she writes extensively about objection and poverty and [writer 2], who write about the grotesque. so, a lot of those theories i was really into because they were all about things that were in the process of becoming, like they were not stagnant, stable, they were kind of porous. so i um i don't even know if i'm answering your question, but i guess i do have an interest in things that are undone or that are because i feel like there's so much potential in things that are happening rather than finished things. and i think that like when i see the little squirrel eating the thing it makes me feel like really feel like something is happening rather than i don’t know if that makes any sense. (laughs) : yeah well i have 2 ways of working i'm predominantly a painter and for the longest time i was primarily working on paper with inks and watercolors and recently i've been getting back into oil and i kind of put them into different categories because the materials behave very differently so i feel like my brain and the way i'm engaging with the material is different so i'll talk about one then the other. so the paper its flat you know there's no i'm not working with gravity so things are not dripping so that means i can create these huge pools of water and let kind of nature do what it does, letting things dry overnight watching the rings of the water dry and then when i come back the next day i kind of project my own. it's kind of like looking at a rorschach blot you know i kind of like look at stuff and i pull things out like i literally feel like i pull out limbs because my work is figurative it's all senecalcea (not sure what that word was) and so the stains help me get started so that's a way of creating a mess and then finding order and then at the end its a finished painting and then with oil paint i don’t work flat. i start out flat, but then its mainly leaning against the wall and i used my works on paper as references and what i do with that i keep flipping the painting every hour so that i'm always unstable so that i don't have a ground and a ceiling and a or a sky and i like to i have this feeling like i never want to know exactly what kind of picture i'm making i want to be in a constant state of surprise and wonder and then  i feel like when the painting is done i arrive at an end. you know its like uh that’s it and then i decide that’s the directions its gonna be : you know i didn’t know that as clearly as i do now years ago but now i know it’s the way i'm relating to the surface i call it like putzing around if i start doing this like i use the word decorative although in the fine art world it's kind of a pejorative word but it's like i start doing the little things "oh a little thing there" (repeats) and for me it's like you're done painting you're now just decorating so i feel like it's like i start out with my full body being fully engaged and its very physical and i'm sweating and i'm really in there and the less detached i get the closer i get to the finish. its like my work here is done, i have nothing else to do  : thank you : is it relating to my art, or in life? : okay... well hmm how do i get started about this okay well the way that i came to art i would say was a very like when i was little i didn’t say that i wanted to be an artist, i wanted to be an athlete i wanted to be at the olympics i was a runner so actually art was a way that i it was kind of escapist and there was a therapeutic, and it was never meant to be observed or critiqued it was just part of my outlet so i wrote a lot i journaled, i drew, i was the typical angsty teenager with a um and then let's see so when i was actually at [university 1], i ran track and the way that i got into the art major was because i got injured. i had these reoccurring like tibia fractures so like after the second time of having a fracture i talked to my advisor and in order to be eligible to run another year you have to pick another major because you have to have a certain number of units because i was gonna be done with my school earlier than my track you know so i was like okay another major, i like to draw, i like to paint, but i guess i'll go do it officially now. so i did that, and i actually really enjoyed it but it was still kind of escapist i didn’t really wasn't into art history i didn’t really care, so maybe my obstacles now but i don’t really know if they're obstacles because i feel like whatever you don’t have allows you a new way to interpret it but if i had to label it as an obstacle it would be i never really had that classical education like how do i render hair how do i mainly because the [university 1] department they it wasn’t very good in that sense i mean i hate to say bad things about the school i love but so i wasn’t really technically trained but the other side of it : i'll say one more thing after i graduated i was very poor. i didn’t have any money and i mean my family were refugees, immigrants so i was never raised with a lot, we were on welfare but what became very obvious to me was that the people after grad school who continued making art a lot of it was very practical, like do you have money to have a studio, do you have money to buy paint so a lot of these- and i didn’t have a studio i didn’t have money so actually i was painting on these tiny little watercolor pieces of paper in my bedroom and i was getting ink that's actually when i went from oil paintings which was in grad school to ink which were illustration materials,  like super cheap, but that’s actually the painting that landed the cover it was a tiny little 8 by 6 inch so the obstacle became actually my big break and when i applied before for this same competition with these big oil paintings that i was putting on my credit card in grad school i never got into the not even on the cover but i never - so it kind of made me realize that maybe you know from my work maybe not for everyone else's but the sense of urgency is important and you don’t have to have the best stuff but just use cardboard if that’s all you have just kind of get it out there and maybe it'll help  convey the message.  : right he's kind of known for right  : yeah well we talk about these different artists you know in the studio like amongst [person 2], [person 1], and i well kind of talk about are you more like picasso are you more like vermeer are you more like um and i am more like picasso in that i make a lot of work in a very short about of time not because i want to get it out there but i personally feel that my work is not better when if i labor on it actually feel like it back to what i want the work to do which is like to feel undone even when it's done if i stay with it longer it closes it up like things become more neat and tidy and tucked away and actually so i make a lot of work and i edit... so its like i'll make fifteen paintings but i'll only put out two so the world knows two but i know that i made fifteen bad ones so its more of a throwing it all out, getting it out and then you know rather than like fixing it on that surface  : yes my i would say that i'm not a conceptual artist although [person 1] and i have made many arguments about this "everything has a concept" but what i mean by that is and i'll use him as a comparison just to, like the way i work and he always makes fun of me he's like you say that for shock value but i’m like no its true and what i say it's like i start a piece not knowing what it is i have like ideas like and i feel like i'm visually hoarding a bunch of stuff  you know it's like i see a person going across the street and something about their yellow bag is interesting or the little squirrel eating something by the little hands on my hike the sounds that i hear it's like how would i paint that you know so when i paint kind of in the process things come and i think it's almost like it comes out of the body and it's like on the surface and then it's like this back and forth you know it needs to exist in order for me to see potential whereas he is more like he comes up with ideas he does all his research he watches a bunch of videos and he picks video stills and then he makes collages and like all this dirty work he does and then he's like alright finally i get to paint so it's like i can never work that way. its so scary i'm like wow its so brain heavy you know its like you have to be very smart for that i don’t really think i'm dumb we make this joke like i'm a dumb painter you know not a smart i don't mean it in a self-deprecating way but um  : that what he says, he was like i don’t know how you make stuff out of nothing he's like if you just gave me four colors and a brush and a surface he was like i would not know how to start. so,  : right yeah : that sounds very familiar actually  : yeah of course : oh wow : well you know bringing it back yeah i say this to [person 1] i never feel like any idea that i may have i'm never impressed with ideas i mean i got back to pick a painting no idea is more interesting to me than a painting and what i mean by that is um like i think painting as a medium has so much potential that if you start out with a very clear idea and most painters who i really like i've read their interviews they’ve said these things you've have to be flexible enough to let the material do something too you know otherwise it's kind of like people who are interesting they tend to show some of their seams they're not like kind of these robotic you know so i anyways i feel like and then there's painters who let the seams show more with the material and then there's those who show less but i think all good ones show them a little bit at least  : yeah : right it is yeah um hmm : you know i always go back to this one moment and i feel like that was a realization that i had as a kid that it's like okay you're... you see things in a strange way and i knew not to talk to other kids about it because it was like different and i just had this intuitive knowing that i wouldn’t even know how to talk about it and it was actually when we were in [country 4] i was about nine, we were in a refugee camp, my mom and i when i say we because my parents divorced before i was born so i was raised by my mom and we fled together so we were it was a convent in [country 3] like this six story huge building but i remember one day it was summer all the kids were playing outside and there was a - it was a quite nice refugee camp like after going to [country 1] and seeing what the others were like wow we actually had it pretty good but anyways there was like a play area for kids and there was a sand box and  all the kids were running around chasing each other, being like you know rowdy kids. i remember being sitting in a sand box and the sand was really warm and it was so weird but i remember like i was wearing like shorts and i remember hiking them up and just feeling the sand and like putting more of my body in it i remember it like it was yesterday and just like i actually saw colors that the sun was giv - like the whole thing became a... it felt like another visual on top of what i was already experiencing you know and i was like this is it i didn’t even know what that was but i was like this right here is it i just had that moment i was i felt this bliss and i only experienced it again and it was in a race. where its like it sounds kind of cheesy but its like you feel like a spirit inside like this glowing big open like air like lots of space, anything is possible just like lots of oxygen whoosh beautiful thing and for me that was like i don’t know if i knew that would mean i'm an artist and i would experience things differently but i knew it was a pivotal moment for me. : so i labeled it as this is it yeah. : so it was nothing to do- : yes  : moments : it's like you're chasing god or something it's like you're always hoping that you'll get a little bit of it but it's so little and i'm getting teary eyed now see it my gosh  (inaudible conversation): yeah when i'm painting it's like i'll find there like a little taste of it and you're like ah, there it is! and like you're painting hoping you'll feel it again but this phrase i had when i was in high school i don’t even know why i'm teary eyed this is so weird... : you do? : aw okay... i'm sorry... sniffles : yeah i remember i was in high school it was my senior year it was like a big invitational and i was really nervous i ran the 1500 meters and i was warming up and my legs felt so heavy and i was like oh my god cant race i was so nervous i went up to my coach and i was like i was doing all these drills like high knees and i was like i can't lift my knee sorry i don’t know what's wrong with me he was like you're just nervous you'll be fine and i remember being so scared i was like i can't race i'm gonna like make a fool of myself i'm gonna come in dead last this is going to be so embarrassing and it was like a huge crowd and i remember the gun went off oh my god sniffles... and the gun went off and i started running and i was like out of body it was (lightly crying) it was such an amazing feeling i didn’t feel anything like there was no pain there was no discomfort there was no sweating like it was weird i didn’t feel like i did it and i won and i won by so much the next runner was 200 meters behind me i ran faster than like before like 20 seconds faster than the mile so its like a huge breakthrough i broke 5 minutes you know so it was like a huge deal for me and i was like what was that and with running i never felt that again. : and with making art it's different, it's not because i think it's not like an exertion its more brain and i feel it when i'm starting a painting or when i do a i felt a little bit of it not yesterday but the day before that i was working on a face of one of my figures and something about how i painted like the area around the eye it was like this and it hits you right here and like my eyes get big and i get so excited and it's like there you are and then it's like all of a sudden i'm told what else to do to that figure, like it's like i get information so it's not as dramatic as the race thing that just made me cry i don’t know yeah that was crazy : yeah it was quite something and i think that that’s when i was a few years later i was reading a book and i was like ah i know what he's describing in that state of complete you know and you can't chase it you're just lucky if it arrives : yeah : yeah the first one that comes to mind was actually one of my teachers at [university 2] she's also an artist her name is [artist 3] if she lived here i would recommend her for this study but she lives in [country 5] now and she was really important for me because when i was [university 2] because it was a very conceptual school they really didn’t encourage personal stories or any kind of personal stuff in the work they wanted it to feel about the world and about events and about something that’s very easily accessible so i was making these small paintings that were actually on paper and with ink of my little i call them like my personal work but i didn’t even know what it was i never um i didn’t put pressure on it because it wasn’t stuff that was being critiqued whereas the stuff i was making that was being critiqued they were big abstract paintings and i actually came in as a figurative painter and abstraction became really it was almost like i did it out of necessity to protect myself because i quickly realized if talked about anything that was personal to me it would get quickly dismissed so then i found theory as an indirect way to talk about stuff so this cristae vine objection and michel bactin and grotesque and rebela and gargantuan and all that stuff i found they became metaphors for me, mainly like signifiers and then they would listen to me, the teachers, and i could have a critique so it was almost like a shared language that we had and if we talked about that, let's look for that in the painting, check it off, moving right along. and its like i almost didn’t like believe in it either, i don’t know it was weird even though i was working for this degree i didn’t really believe in its funny i did i was fully invested in the work but i don’t know i felt there was a lid and then i started working with [artist 4] who came into my studio and i didn’t cover my little works on paper and she was like what's that? and i was like embarrassed oh its nothing its not art you know. she was like i would like to talk about those if that’s okay and it wasn’t a class she was just there so i felt more okay so i put it out and there were like these tiny things there were like 50 of them we put them on the table she was like [] this is really good work this is really powerful and i was like really you thought so she was like yeah you don't have to say anything this is so much about war about trauma about violence but not just about yours but about at the time [country 6] like stuff in [country 6] was really you know she was like i don’t need it to be relevant it is relevant i feel connected to it so she was really huge for me because she made me feel that you know maybe it just takes one person to see it and that’s okay you know i felt, i felt because it's kind of a different thing being an athlete and being an artist. an athlete like the time measures how good you are being a runner but with art its so subjective that you know like you need another person or an audience to say something otherwise you're just kind of yelling into the void, hello! anyone there! : so she was kind of that for me she was huge and the a couple other less significant but still significant in their own way is um [person 3] she was another grad student who worked at [university 3] but she would come visit and she was more actually interested in my personal story than my art so that became a that’s kind of why i feel like that was a smaller significant person than [artist 4] because [artist 4] was both, it was art, and then there were others who um yeah and my mom again she has such a beautiful eye she's not a trained artist but um she would come in and in her broken english and her little you know. "oh this is so good da, provocative right here this is nice [] keep it going" and she would sometimes say "don’t use pastels they're very boring colors use red". so she would say these kind of you know cheesy things and i'm like oh mom but you know i don’t know her opinion really matters to me i feel like she i really feel like she knows what's good art even if she's never had the formal- in movies she's had me watch really interesting films when i was younger and yeah so yeah : you mean as a teacher or even when i go and artists talk : yeah you know right now i work two times a week i work at this place called [art institution] where i work with adults who have various intellectual i don’t even think they are disabilities i think they are more special than most professional artists but and that’s different i would say than when i'm invited to do a talk and then i do studio visits with grad students and stuff in that i feel like you know when i work at [art institution] they don’t really need me i'm more of a facilitator like they don't it's not about analyzing it whereas when i go visit schools and when i work with grad students what i've learned over time is that the best thing i can do is hear them, see what they're doing and figure out ways to help them get that thing that they want sorry it’s a little abstract but i guess what i mean by that is i had some teachers at [university 2] who i felt like they really had their own vision and when they came to do studio visits with me they literally told me use a rag instead of a brush to create this transparent effect which is what they did you know so it was like it was very topical and then i had a few actually another significant one [person 4], he was not like that he was like what do you want these feet to tell me. i was like i want the feet to be tired and he was like okay and he would help me use the painting language you know if you use green versus orange how is that color gonna - so i try to do more of a [person 4] approach which is like what do you want, how can we go there together what do you think you want because sometimes they don’t know what they want or if they're really nonverbal i start out by "this is what i see is this at all relevant to what you're"... and sometimes they're like no i don’t want it to do that and even in the rejection of what i'm saying i learn about what they want : so it's a lot of being very i guess flexible i feel like as a teacher as a mentor as and i really enjoy being that way i feel like it's kind of athletic thing to have to like emotionally mentally readjust to people and show up in a new form : um i would just say that the main reason should be again at the risk of sounding cheesy you have to love the process you have to really get a lot of nourishment from just doing and you cannot expect to be famous or well known or because then you will be very disappointed... and i guess i sound like a hypocrite a little bit back on you know saying you need someone to say something back you need some kind of affirmation or someone saying yes i hear you, like cannot be the goal you know i feel like i would just say that make sure that you have this thing you have to have a an urgency inside of you to get this thing out there and that'll be enough even if you're poor i mean you'll have other reasons to worry other things to worry about but you'll get some kind of nourishment i feel like a lot of people don’t get its quite special : umm... you know it’s a combina - you know maybe like next in the same piece or maybe in next project is that more what you mean? : okay you know it's a combination of what happened in the previous one i always read alongside while i'm making work about whatever interests me so right now i'm reading 3 books going back and forth between the swan written by this an artist david bachelor it's called chromophobia it's all about why in the west we have an aversion to color. he wrote another book called the luminesce and the grey and then i'm reading this third one its called studio talks i have it in my bag what's it called again its like my bible, "studio talks-thinking through painting" and i picked it up when i was in [city 1] for a show its basically this curator interviewed a bunch of artists from [state] and [country 7] talking about their painting process so my new project is going to come somehow from my own painting and reading these things and i have a sketchbook like a notebook where i write stuff down and you know sometimes even all that makes me feel like no new ideas again i don’t work with ideas but i could read all this and not feel like i call it being filled up like i might still be like there's nothing i need to do now i just read these books they're great, i made this painting they're great i have nothing else to offer to the world and that's okay like i've learned that’s okay i just pick a new thing to read or go to shows, go to museums, watch movies, like there's always i think of all as studio time even going out for a walk i feel like its research you know so its : right? another squirrel (laughs). its funny to me to call it squirrel because i always say it in [language], and [person 1] says squirrel in [language] now too its called vjeverica and he thinks it’s a really cute word yeah so now i refer to squirrels as vjeverica so to be calling it squirrel oh yes it’s a cute little thing i see yeah : yeah good pronunciation you know you right  : exactly... i actually have to use the bathroom i was wondering i wanted to be more comfortable and i don’t know how much longer we have is that okay if we take we take is that okay sorry i think i remember where it is : thank you  : oh my gosh  : well thank you  : really? it must be interesting for you as like a scientist to hear me say these things and then know what's happening maybe i don’t know  : yeah well yeah : vjeverica i'll write it down for you it's actually i don’t know if you're visual i have to have it  : but people tell me their name i visualize it i'm like that how it looks right oh here it is(writes down vjeverica and says it) : it's really weird looking [language] is like a lot of consonants next to each other : that one doesn’t no : yep  : just watching it woah what was that?(apparently all watching a video of a squirrel) : you know um i prefer to be alone but i do have a studio with [person 2] and [person 1] and its okay because we have walls if we didn’t i think it would be harder for me um and we have to tell each other okay guys we're not gonna talk now because sometimes we can get chatty um like i can't even well lately i've been listening to a little bit of music but i can't talk and paint its uh i become removed some people can i think the more realistic painters um and [person 1] talks to me about this so he used to paint even more realistically than he does now but he was like when i would work on a coat i call up mom because it's just like a bunch of like folds if you're painting folds it's like he was like its formulaic it's like dark light cool warm for bababa trails off so i was like huh but i think because how i work and i flip the painting over so many times i never know what's going to happen i have to be very present so people i find distracting. love people but not when i'm making the work (laughs) : yeah well like i said for the when i make oil paintings i use multiple works on paper as references but i also do this thing that actually started in uh at [university 2] i have a lot of anxiety and actually started feeling it more again like around 25 i started feeling things more physically like i probably always had anxiety which is why i loved running probably you know um at around 25 i started feeling it in my throat or so sometimes when i paint things my characters will have like these really beautiful necklaces and i'll kind of create things based on how i feel in many ways and all of a sudden the character will have a and then i have color associations with certain feelings so i don’t know why but when i think of anxiety i think of like different kinds of yellow so like i'll make those yellows and i'll put those color swatches almost i'll put them on to remind me but i also make these i call them human hair balls but my mom she refurbishes vintage clothing and she'll often send me stuff she can't refurbish or sell and sometimes i'll wear this stuff but often if i don't like it i'll take piece of clothing and i'll tear it up and bind it and i'll make these they kind of look like intestinal bally like... i don’t even know how to describe them but they're i guess in the contemporary art world it would be called sculptures but i do them mainly when i have so much anxiety and it just needs to come out and stuff happens so i have these things hanging in my studio and often times when i want the character to be holding something i'll look on the wall and its like oh! that thing! and it'll be like this intestinal necklace thing and i'll paint it into the painting or um yeah but its all stuff that i made that i use as references whether it’s a sketch or those things  : or clothes i have a lot of these clothes my mom gives me  : yeah the things i make i think its um well um when i have anxiety it's almost like i feel all kinds of stuff inside and i don’t know where it should go and i, it's in a way it's like a they become these physical embodiments for it to go somewhere so they're not like i'm into voodoo or anything like if i had to use it they're like little voodoo things like where bad energy goes and then i can then also feel like empathy towards them it's like ooh you pathetic little thing and then it's like i have this like i can look at myself again it's like uh the little things are like my things and i can hold it like a baby and i sometimes they do have these like baby like qualities and my... uh yeah so i guess i don’t know if that answered your question but  : right : it does, i don’t even know if this is like room for it it's like my own personal stuff i've worked with a therapist with um but i do have a very interesting relationship with my mom. its um on one hand i really love her and i respect her and she's the world to me but on other on this other side i really have a lot of anger towards her um starting way back when we were uh refugees we were alone the two of us and when we were in one refugee camp she fell in love with this guy who's now my stepdad but then when we became relocated which was about 3 hours away and we were at another refugee camp she would leave me alone for days with the other refugees to take care of me so she could go see him and i think she experienced she has ptsd i'm pretty certain i don't know how any one couldn't have gone through a war and not so i think she was doing that to self-soothe i don’t you know i'm analyzing her as all things are but you know i don’t think she's like oh screw my child you know i think  : it's like she needed love and i think but she would leave and when she would come back and you know when i was left alone i did things i vaguely remember them but i'm like i don’t know if i would have done that if i had other things to do like i remember taking showers with like older people in there and like luckily nothing happened but like it might have not been like they were public showers you know i do remember like scrubbing an older woman's body like i just have like moments of this and i'm like what was i doing, why was i doing that um and then uh maybe this part can uh shouldn’t go like if you guys use this for research i don’t know if it's going to be public  : oh okay  : okay  : oooh okay yeah : yes yes i'm a big amygdala that’s awesome : well you can use i mean the only part that i would just feel it's like not that i'm even feel like it's irrelevant to the study but like just like personal stuff about my mom you know it's like not even that interesting  : share share on about the amygdala (laughs) yeah well if necessary yes. but anyways with her this man oh one thing i wanted to say and this is that same feeling in that same refugee camp where i was like this is it that moment: when i met this man she's with right now it was the opposite it was like no my body was like no not okay and i had no words for it i just like he smelled strange to me like it was all these non verbal cues that i was like this is not a good man and i hate i remember throwing typical kid tantrums when the mom starts seeing someone else not that i ever knew my dad so there's no comparison but anyways long story to make a long story short he ended up abusing me sexually and when i told my mom she didn’t believe it still to this day its been like there were years where we didn’t talk um and she's still with him and i have a beautiful half sister that she had with him that i love so this man who i hate gave me this amazing sister you know but so with my mom its interesting that you bring up her and the tying i think there is something there and in my paintings often times i'll have these lines that weave through that are almost like create this chaos but then i kind of want to create a semi ordered chaos i weave these um the kind of look like thread i have a painting called the undoing of knots um so maybe its in there too in the paintings. yeah  : yeah i've been imagining like a solo show and i would show the little hair balls and the paintings and let people draw their own conclusions : yeah so in my paintings i have a lot of women like babies and i have a lot of these like um mother and child madonna and child motifs not that i'm even looking at art history but it ends up reoccurring a lot of times these kids are like severed limbs and they're a little horrendous like goya paintings almost you know so they are not you know sweet mother and child it's more like oh my god : yeah  : oh okay cool : yeah right i would say that my nature is the uninhibited kind where i kind of just plah! (makes noise) but as i get closer to you know i call it i have percentages to where the painting is and that’s how i know its like at 40% its at 60% and its just like an intuitive knowing so the closer i get to like from like 60 to 80% the moves are more controlled. so it starts out with complete chaos but then and actually fear there's a i was talking to [person 1] i'm like do you ever feel fear when you're putting on a mark hes like, " no no  never feel fear" i think i was just trying to be funny and i'm like that’s interesting because i'll actually feel my hand be a little scared and um that’s where i would say it is control where i would it to do one thing and there's certain things this is just like paint nerdy stuff but the way that i paint especially if its like wet on wet like if i have like a wet light grey and if i want to put in a really hot color through it and make it seem like its gliding through you cant really restate it, it feels different it has an energetic so if you don’t get it right you kind of like have to wait for it to dry and start from scratch in my opinion you cant like oh lemme fix that because then it looks hesitant and it reads differently there's like a then it becomes more about like looking for the right mark rather than this is it so um so id say both happen but at different stages in the painting  : and it's almost like the more that you know back to like everything we talked about earlier knowing and not knowing what you're doing the closer you get to knowing even if it's not a you know the knowing kind of like a samuel beckett kind of play knowing you know where it's kind of aspartic but the closer you get to the truth of the piece the more that its precise i'd say and in the beginning you don’t really know at least i don’t  : oh wow i'd love to read that : oh really? : yeah really  : and then you're like alright... you also screaming the void someday (inadudible): well i think that’s why i love talking to scientists and people who are inventing things because there's a comradery you feel with like you know speaking to a few you know you never know  : i do too thank you : what does sesquipedalian mean?  -: (laughter) and you’re the most sesquipedalian. : did you put the word palliate on the test at the end that i didn't know what that meant.  : palliate. : yeah.  : sesquipedalian. but then there's : there is two.  : yeah palliate.  : oh yeah, did you see that movie [movie 1]? : it's one of my favorite movies of all time.  : i love [writer 1].  : my favorite word in the english language. defenestrate.  : do you know that one? : yes! it's so and you know i always try to get it in a sentence but it's almost impossible to try to find the opportunity.  : unless you create the situation. how do you like being defenestrated? you know. (laughter) : yeah it does. just to be able to use the word it seems a little over the top.  : yeah. : what is that? : in a castle in scotland? and they got a fringe festival there? : is she on the fringe? : i see.  : ok. : oh wow. (laughter) i hope she get's back in. regains her fenestra. : yeah. : ok. : that's right. i am known throughout the world. absolutely. (laughter) : yeah. yeah. yeah. : ok. : yeah. : alright. thank you.  : yeah. : ok. : yeah. i got that.  : no. (laughter) : oh [person 1] has read flow.  : oh ok. : ok.  : what am i most proud of?  : and so i should have thought about that. (laughter) i had an advantage to think ahead of time and i didn't. like as in artwork?  : i mean it's almost like, it's hard to know how to answer the question the most truthful way because in a certain sense whatever i have done most recently i feel like that has been successful is what i end up being most proud of because i think kind of what we're most proud of is what we need to feel proud of at a given time. so to feel like i'm evolving. i feel like i'm very proud of whatever is most recent. but more specific than that i would say that i did this exhibition in 2012 called the imagine chase and that showed at a gallery called [gallery 1] in [city 1] and i did an animation with other animators of it was called the evangelist. and, i, so where to start. so my house burned down in 2007. my apartment and that was started by my upstairs neighbor. who had some kind of, some kind of like mental trauma or something so he was convinced he had demons in his unit and stuff like that and wanted to burn them out and he wasn't in the presence of mind to think about the neighbors and so on and so the place burned down and that was 2007. around early 2010, i had been thinking about him off and on over the years but then i thought how can i, like what he's doing. you know, what happened to him. cause i knew him a little bit, i would say hello on the stairs or whatever and he always seemed like a nice guy. and so it took about, about six months to find him and then after doing so, the way that i found him was actually through his dad. so i found his dad and then his dad helped me convince him to be a part of the project. so then i interviewed him kind of like what we're doing now and that interview was so fascinating to me that i decided to interview three other people one of which was my father, another one is a pretty famous cartoonist actually. who wanted to be a part of the study. name is [cartoonist 1]. another one is a friend of mine whose bipolar disorder i think got so out of hand that he lost everything from his apartment to his job to his home and became homeless. but basically what all four of these individuals had in common was that they were middle aged men who had some kind of psychological trauma at some point in their life that. anyway, so i took these interviews and i took all of the little pieces of them and re-arranged them so i am taking something that was like honest and sincere and then kind of imposing a mythological status for them. like they're prophets, that’s why i call them the evangelists kind of like matthew, mark, luke and john you know. and then we created these 3d models in the program maya in their likeness and then animated them. and they're sort of talking as in a chorus and they're like these four floating heads. i had that permission and they knew what was going on ahead of time. i told them it's art and fiction and it's not, like no one is going to know their names unless they let, unless sam let me use his name. so then we did like this animation, it was 12 minutes long and then the content of what it was that they were saying, i used to inform the paintings i was making in an installation that i made. and it was kind of like i was kind of like using their voices to articulate a sense of anxiety that i myself was feeling at the time because i was going through a divorce. then i could kind of like use that parallel somehow to my own history and experience. and that whole exhibition is, i mean that started something. i created this concept out of that called the religion and that still informs my work now. but i think that particular exhibition was really important to everything that came after.                                                                                   : i think it was just that we figured out how to do it.  : you know like i had no experience, i mean i had done a little animation like i've experimented with it a little bit but i am not an animator you know i had eight others helping and just to like create. i don't know if i know how to articulate it. it felt, it felt historical. you know it felt like also redemptive. like me, for them, yeah i guess for me and for them. you know kind of like taking something that is steeped in suffering and tragedy and hardship and to make something beautiful out of it. and i think in many ways if you read or if you're just interested in like, like religious traditions and our like most treasured religious figures and stuff like that i think if somebody were to come up to you and sort of describe their experience as being similar to any of theirs, they're just being impulsed to kind of write it off as mental illness or craziness or something like that. but then to like give them the dignity of a role that actually has an importance somehow. it makes me feel more sane. you know at a time where i don't necessarily, at a time i didn't necessarily feel sane.                                                                                                                       : you know. so then there is also the self-consciousness about being exploitive though that came with it. i kind of included that in a way. so the quotes i took out of context kind of pointed back at me. as sort of like implicating myself and the malleability of the narrative.   : you know. cause so much of what you chose to leave out of frame, gives, if you have eight hours of footage and you can only have 12 minutes then you're really choosing what goes into the frame and what doesn't.  : i don't know how to answer that in any short way but i have a deep fascination about religion partly i grew up very religious and then i sharply went away from that and was very angry for quite a while then i felt like i only really knew much about my own religion years after i wasn't a part of it anymore. you know and the anger dissipated because i started realizing that it was a lot more complicated than i was willing to see at the time. so the question, what is religion? turns out to be almost impossible to answer but you can take elements of it and you can find it in human behavior. everywhere. i find that religion is ubiquitous and that it's something that the way we come to believe that anything is true you know the way that we come to give meaning to our lives through narratives we replay in our heads, all of these things are elements of religion and i think that i don't know i just wanted to bring that out somehow. you know like underneath it i like wonder like when we talk about like madness or insanity or something like that i wonder if it's really even human or it's just like an expression of nature itself. you know. and i don't know it's just like an open question, it's just like i have a lot of notions and then i just kind of like just want to explore them.                                                    : the relationship between madness and creativity.  : yeah. : well i certainly know a wide variety of people in the art world that i would put on all areas of stability. you know. there's some to seem to be very stable and there are others not at all.  : and i don't know where i fall on that spectrum exactly but you know. but i don't like, to me it's almost like once somebody becomes a social liability then it's convenient to call them ill. you know. and it doesn't mean that they're not necessarily. i don't know. that's not my area. you know but i have the sensation sometimes of like feeling like the everyday world i live in isn't real. you know and that you have more of a direct communion with that profound reality through the work itself. and you can get through the shared reality that we all take for granted as such you know. so i think to say that in mixed company would make me seem a little nuts to some people you know but we have this slang term we developed in the studio, [person 2], [person 1] and i, about the surface dwellers.       : the surface dwellers and the subterranean and i think we live in a crazy world and i think what the surface dwellers take for granted is real is totally fucking crazy you know. in a certain sense it's like kind of absurdity to be in your studio making stuff that the vast majority of people will never know or care about it but to me i think it's insane to work at google and sell ad space all day. like that to me is fucking nuts. i don't even understand that.   : you know. so. : i mean if you're talking about the art world there's just so many obstacles. you know and that's because there's so many biases and isms and things like that, agendas too. you know so i think like it wouldn't be unique to say i faced these obstacles because everyone does. but i would say to sort of point to concrete things is the fact that i don't have an mfa when most of my peers do. and that matters a lot more than i would have understood at the time. and it's not even really so much that it matters whether you have an mfa by so much that if you have an mfa from the schools that the people you deal with in the art world know about. so having an mfa from [college 1] would alleviate some of the obstacles that i'm faced with because [college 1] is such a reputable art school and in [city 2] at least with all the dealers and writers and everything like that they all look to [college 1] so that's an obstacle.  : good question. : i mean at the same time i'm also realistic enough to know that the majority of people coming out with [college 1] mfa's aren't necessarily going to be better off but at least for that minority, having that platform gave them a visibility that they would not have otherwise and wouldn't have ended up as good. but the way that i have tried to overcome it in the past is i would try to get to know the people that i'm working around and what they do and i feel like as far as the community itself the artist community nobody that i am around cares. it's not like they personally care. it's more just like an art dealer who is going to be afraid to take some risks. you know so it's less risky to, it's pedigree.                                                                                                                                                               : you know so how do you overcome not having the pedigree i feel like the strategy in the past has been to work harder to be smarter. to make better work. and to the point where it couldn't be ignored. and there's been mixed results. you know. so yeah.  : well it really depends, i wouldn't give them any advice without seeing their work. i would have to see their work first before i knew what kind of advice to give them. i mean there would be some i would just say don't.   : really for their own sake. : it's not a nice world. (laughter) to be a part of if you know you don't even have a chance. you're just going to be. : (laughter) : well i don't know precisely when i started because it was such a like a slow changes. you know cause i got my, i got a bfa in 2002 from the [college 3]. and i only kind of ended up at that school for a few not very interesting reasons but i couldn't really go out of state and i needed scholarship money and they gave me some. so it's like where i ended up basically. and my degree actually is called visual communications. so it's actually more of like graphic design heavy and a little bit of illustration. and so when i got out of school i thought i would be an illustrator and a graphic designer which i was for a little bit. along with other part time jobs as a framer and all this stuff just cobbling together. and i, actually i love comic books and graphic novels at the time you know. and i had my own series briefly even for. and then [cartoonist 1] who was in my animation i was talking about. i worked with him at a certain point. and to give a sense of what that would have been like, i was like 23, 24. yeah somewhere like that and i still had like an answering machine. (laughter) you know. so i got a call, and it was him and he has this pitch perfect radio voice and so it was you know like, i was like, literally like dancing cause i could not believe i was getting this voicemail from [cartoonist 1]. he's famous in the comics world, probably most famous for [comic book 1] which is this comic book he did and then it became an animated series on [television network 1] in the mid 90's. so when i was a teenager i grew up reading and watching that. so now one of my teenage heroes was now calling me to work on something with him which was. you know so that to me was like huge you know and that was great to work with him on that and we've been great friends ever since. but overall working in those i realize that you're being asked to provide a service. you know like and often intentionally to imitate other artists for whether it would be for like an editorial illustration or be something for fashion or whatever like. and so usually i could not make enough money from freelance to pay the bills. but i would also when i wasn't getting work i would make my own work and then sometimes a friend or somebody would invite me to be in some silly group show or something and every once in a while i would sell something for 200 bucks or something like that you know. and then just after kind of getting more involved in making my own work and hating to work for art directors. and that transition happened slowly to where, like literally to like coffee shops and hair salons and stuff like that to where things are at the moment but it never was like almost. all i did was make work where somebody would give me some kind of response like if i could get response or encouragement then i would just keep working and then it just kind of filtered into this kind of gallery museum world and i left comics behind. : i mean i grew up as an artist so you know that was what i got positive reinforcement for. is you know, earliest memories. : yeah so it was you know when i think i was a kid i wanted to be a soccer player and artist so (laughter) so one became more realistic in a certain way than the other. and so doing.  : yeah, yeah i yeah, i wasn't good enough to be like a pro soccer player (laughter). but yeah so i think like the whole illustration graphic design thing was like the pragmatic approach you know to have very like conservative parents, nobody in my family is an artist or anything. i didn't know very much about art either. i wasn't doing that to be like a good kid that's just what i wanted to do.         : i got kind of lucky, i got kind of lucky you know because i remember when like because as far back as going to kindergarten and my mom going to class and the teachers telling her i was good at drawing. and then it was kind of weird but there was this a, i'm not going to go on an astrology thing here cause i don't believe in it but whatever the case is i had this twin, his name was [person 3] we happened to be born on the same day and he was also a good drawer. and he would draw castles and i would draw people. and so he would draw the castles and i would populate them. and then basically it turned out there was a few other good artists that the teachers were talking about that there was more good artists that year than usual. so they made a little after school class for like eight of us or something like that. and then that like i mean that kind of set the tone. it was always like that. it was always i know i just got like a lot of acknowledgement. for that and i mean i did well in school and stuff like that. and other types of classes but it's not like i wasn't good at math or science. i was very verbal and i was good at drawing and things like that. you know.                                              :  yeah and i mean it's just like a little public school and not a very like wealthy area or anything actually everybody was pretty much like kind of like i would say lower middle class. and it was just the teacher's idea. you know.  : i mean they, they understood that. they were like never, i would say they were neither supportive or unsupportive. you know they were pretty, they didn't, they didn't try to keep me from majoring in art or something. mainly because i was the first one to go to college at all. and my family, so the fact that i was just going to college made them super happy. it didn't really matter what my major was. you know.                    : like that i knew personally.  : i mean in college i actually had an illustration professor who was also a painter. and he, i took a class with him where he was teaching academic painting, the nuts and bolts like how do you do it, the old master stuff. that's actually it talk to, i know you've talked to a lot of other artist and i don't know how much you've talked about art school but that's actually rarely taught.     : yeah and that like, concepts when i was out of school in 2000. concepts i didn't even know probably what the word meant. (laughter) you know what i mean there is no concepts, there is not a, it wasn't a good school for art. it's just that they had an art program. so. : i mean that gave me something tangible. something i needed because i always was drawing and i was always interested in how to tell a story visually. and i wanted to know how to do something really well. like that so i just, there was also, he was just so cool. i liked him so much and it was sort of like i think in a way he was kind of like the father figure that i kind of wanted so i kind of just like latched on. everything he said was truth. you know. yeah. yeah. yeah.  : it is. yeah. i actually just started teaching at a university level this past semester. and i taught art history and now i'll teach painting which is better. but before that i was teaching these workshops at a high school north of [city 1] twice a year. and at some point or another i worked with all ages. i like when we were doing this, we were working with refugee kids and there was actually just like these belgian school kids. i get a lot out of that. actually i feel like it's like a way out of myself. you know it's kind of a freedom in a way like to a, to care about somebody else. also it gives you, you get a much better perspective. like you lose perspective just staying in your studio or just talking to other artists. whereas like you want as idiosyncratic as you are. you know like. you say something and you realize they have no idea what you're talking about. wow take ten steps back. this is like how you are oriented in the world you're not in this rabbit hole. that doesn't represent the reality. you know these kids really give you a level perspective on what's really going on.         : mhm.  : that's an interesting question. i'm actually curious when you first started asking this question about, i'll answer the question i won't like (laughter) deflect : oh that's really interesting, yeah. yeah i don't know i mean have like these sweeping generalities that are going to break down and not be true at a certain point but i have found in recent history in terms of like contemporary painting that most of the contemporary painting i'm interested in and care about right now is almost all being made by women. and i think that might have to do with a level of trust of instinct. and because the schools kinda have like, they seem to have like a bias the other way. you know. there's still way more like men being represented in higher end galleries and their work is generally selling for more and if you find the same inequity in the art world as you find in the world at large but i think that's a big difference actually cause the painting i'm seeing made, cause i use to see men make painting that was more reliant on instinct you know in the twentieth century. you know and then i don't know what the shift has been but it seems like those carrying that torch right now are mostly women and i'm really interested in that and that's the work i'm looking at more. but i also think that there's also something socially learned somewhere along the way like i feel like men are still like they're more cut throat, competitive. you know, they'll do anything more then. and so i think in certain ways that also that gives the work more weight because there is a part of us that sort of wants to be the king of it all. that's kind of like conquering aspect. which interestingly enough sometimes makes bad work. you know so i don't know those are differences that i see. i think about them. i also think men feel like more, more obligated for some reason to, to situate their work in history and to say that they're going to respond to this specific thing and have an answer for every little question that they can anticipate, myself included. so sometimes what is said, or what is represented rings false. you know and i find that like at least with the women artists i know, there doesn't seem to be the same insistence on having every answer and that makes the work more fluid. you know ever since i have been with [person 1] i feel like i have learned a lot. and i think the work has gotten a lot better as a result. cause it was sort of a way, i feel like it sort of get more in line with a natural instinct that maybe i would feel more self-conscious about.  : i think that she's pushed herself harder since we've been together and we both have. you know. maybe she needed some kind of permission that that was ok. you know and then i think she also used to have a lot of like judgement about skill-based work. which a lot of it is super cheesy. that's what she was saying and it was true for a large extent. you have this really, if you have this derivative, classical work. it just rings false because we've been through that in history and like consciousness has changed to some degree so we don't get the same feeling out of it that we maybe would have. the way things look should probably change like the way the world changes. you know and she would make fun of that a lot of times but then i always had this basis. you know this realistic skeleton underneath because weight and light were so important to me. that never changed. even as i disrupted the pictorial plane i still wanted that sense of weight and light. i would never, i never had any reason to destroy those rules completely. you know and i think that she's kind of seen like where she would have like been judgmental about that that i get the feeling now was actually a self-consciousness on her part. because she didn't have the confidence to feel she knew how to do that. and then now as the work is developing, we talk about each other's work every day. you know she'll ask me really specific things about how do you do this here? and then what's great about it is i'll kind of look at it the way i would look and then see it the way if it were mine what i would do. and then i'm like you could do this or that. and she feels good about what i said but when i come back and look at it, yes it's amazing what she did to it but it's not what i was describing. so (laughter) it's better than what i was describing. you know what i mean so it's like she took what i said interpreted it another way and somehow it helped her find her way forward in painting. i mean it's a great collaboration because we're both surprised in the process you know. : mhm. yeah. : man i swear it's like spookier the older i get. you know what i mean like maybe i shouldn't trust my own instincts, my own judgement but you know, i don't know i think i almost feel like many of my closer friends would just kind of agree. i mean almost just tell like by posture and facial expressions. you know, like what they want to talk about. i don't know. i don't know because sometimes you'll see, you know it's not about a level of confidence or security necessarily either because you can see sometimes in the younger artists they don't have that yet but they still you know like if they just keep working. you know they'll really have something. often times those are the one's with the lowest confidence. or maybe it's because they have a deep down confidence and they're afraid to expose themselves. you know but yeah i don't know. i don't know there's all kinds, i mean whether, that's why if somebody is asking for advice and when you asked me that question earlier i interpreted like my quick assumption or imagination was about being asked that online, like an email because i get those you know like an email or something like that. [person 1] gets them too. and then so they ask you some question about how do you get a gallery or how do you. you know stuff like that and then you click on their like or their jpeg or whatever they send and like oh man. like i can't like this conversation is not going to happen you know.  : and it's almost as if by asking that you can tell they're focused on the wrong thing. it should be just focusing on making the work better.  : like they should know the difference. they should know that they're not ready. the very fact that they are asking means that they can't see you know.  : funny enough, my mom doesn't remember this but i like bringing it up, she likes to hear it again you know. when i was telling you about this kindergarten class. you know like every kid i drew stick figures. the first time i ever drew figures you know and i just remember one day my mom being like look you can do it this way too and she basically drew like a little gingerbread man. so it was hollow in the middle rather than just sticks.     : and i was just like nice, like a light bulb went off like ohhh now you can dress them you know what i mean. you can figure out that they have knees and they have elbows and so they can like move their arms and put their little like and i remember them saying that the, oh yeah, the reason why the teacher said i was good at drawing was because i drew every little thing on the person so like their eyelashes and their fingernails and all that stuff like it was so it was really because she opened up the figure for me. i mean that was, otherwise they really didn't like have any other idea like what i was doing or anything like that i don't think that my mom would have understood how important that was you know. my mom is not educated at all and my dad he's very clever but not really a little more than i mean he's naturally bright he just doesn't technically have an education you know. and so there wasn't a, i said they were neither supportive or unsupportive but from time to time they would like not want me to show something to somebody. you know like a my grandma or, you know they were afraid it would scare them or something like that. you know i once got in trouble from my mom when i was about thirteen for drawing naked ladies. (laughter).  which is pretty funny but                 : right. so. : so i had to learn how to hide those better.  : and then like you know what was the thing that was really hard was once i started going to college then and they were having a lot of trouble. but until like literally super recently like as of a couple months ago like up until from then until a couple months ago they like didn't pay any attention like they like had, you know it used to be so strange to me to raise as a kid and not like want to, you know that's quite an investment. you know you have to give your whole, you have kids? : yeah i mean don't you need to know how everything is going to turn out for them right? : yeah right. you put in all this time and all this effort and it's money you know. and you dealt with their bullshit for however long.  : then how did they turn out? don't you want to, i need to pull the curtain back and have a look you know. : and they just didn't. you know so it was like you know certain things you'll find is common in families. you know if somebody gets married or has kids or something like that everybody is super involved with you. like the first time i ever had a solo show at a real museum or a show in a real gallery or travel around to museums or something like that there was no, they had no comparison to know is that hard to do is that important you know. it's just like it was important so it was just like, and so my dad being very religious too sometimes he deliberately did not want to look. you know so he would like, he would like come on business trips to the bay area where i was living in for the longest time. : and so here was there once a month and i had to live work. so you would have to come in downstairs to where the studio was to upstairs where my wife and i at the time lived. and he would be in my studio and literally just like never look at anything or show, it was like there was nothing in the room. it was like it could have been like an empty room and i would be the same.   : and it was just so bizarre, it was just like you know he's a recovering addict and a born again christian and all this stuff so it's like there's a lot of thought control. you know like don't look at certain things that trigger certain thoughts and you know i think that's what my work did for him and i think he tried to avoid it and somehow it was this because he does a lot of like missionary stuff and things like that and so we went on this trip i think to him it was sort of like parallel of like doing missionary work or something like that. you know which i don't think so personally but he, it was like a book and when we showed it to him he was like it was amazing because of everybody we showed it to, we were at dinner, [person 1] and me with him and he would just go through like every single page and if there was writing on it he would read the whole page and all of dinner went this way. and we were there forever i mean because i would never like, he never looked at anything and all of a sudden there is a book and somehow there was a book and maybe it was the format you know like in all those years i never thought to change the format i guess you know. : and then he really liked it. like he loved it. and ever since then he just kind of been more inquisitive. you know when's your next show that kind of type of thing. i don't know it like send some signal to him and my mom came out to visit for the first time in a decade and then we had a studio visit with a fellow artist and i couldn't cancel it because he was going to be moving with his family so i had to take my mom with me. and during the studio visit he was actually captivated. i was afraid she would be bored but she was really interested and then that was like a month ago and ever since then she has been asking me about and i thought that was really great i had no idea what was behind the work or whatever. you know all this time. so i don't know second chances i guess.  : a brother and a sister. : yeah. : brother. they're both younger. my brother is three years younger my sister is six years.  : they're not artists. my brother is an outdoorsman and he is starting his own business and my sister is a, well now she's kind of she's not working she has two kids.  : it's like a, i guess maybe i don't know how you work, but probably the ideas don't come from nowhere. it comes from what you were doing before right? like so it's been building from one thing to the next for so long. i do like to start with questions. you know the whole what is religion question has been fueling the work ever since i thought to ask. you know i mean right now i'm really interested in the legacy of westward expansion and thoughts and beliefs about progress and what that is and what it means.  : and sometimes my ideas come from things that really piss me off. like there is a couple of really important things i suppose i remember going to this talk at the gallery i was represented at the time. i'm just going to say this kind of like douchebag art dealer who was there wearing his sunglasses inside all the time saying how nobody can ever possibly make anything that's relevant if they don't travel and i started thinking about how first of all that's relevant to such a subjective word and without a direct object that's meaningless so to whom it is relevant is basically like the question and apparently the answer is if it's relative to him or not which if somebody doesn't travel it's not relevant to him. because i think he lives in this kind of top down environment where he doesn't understand the depth of his own classism. : i was just like i was just like thinking my, one of my truly happy places on planet earth is in the oceanic collection in the [museum 1] which is all this work from papua new guinea which is super relevant to me because i feel transported when i'm there. it's, i feel like it gets me in touch with something i wouldn't be able to otherwise. i don't think any of them ever left the island.   : you know like so then i specifically wanted to make work that was dealing with north america. i got, i have been lucky that i have got to travel a bit. i don't think i would have had to make the work, i am making now.  : you know. and then the other thing is you know in like the, the world that i move in there, of course everything is super on the left. you know we're all pretty calibrated to the far left end of the spectrum. so there's like now a lot of self consciousness about being a white male, and so i really started thinking, cause i can't avoid the conversation like i think, i think the instinct for a lot of while males is try to avoid the conversation because we feel implicated or somebody might be judged or something. and if you look at like, and if we're at the legacy of colonialism. then maybe at some point it's incumbent on us to kind of take a look you know and see what it is we're standing on. and so the work that i'm dealing with now is facing that you know trying to like reconcile with certain aspects of history or do you know the artist [artist 1].    : he's a super famous german artist. painter and a sculptor. and does photographs that he pours light on. oh ok. he talks a lot about alchemy.         : he became, he studied under [artist 2] who's a big like german staple in the global art world you know so kind of like the environment that [artist 1] came up in is what you would call now neo-expressionism which probably doesn't mean that much but he right out of school started doing these like paintings and taking photographs of himself doing the like nazi salute as like an ironic gesture because he was in an environment that didn't want to like think about it or talk about it anymore. and so it was like he would have been i suppose there's a very good chance like his father was a nazi right. probably didn't have, i didn't know what the other options were you know. and he's kind of like taking this, he'll make this huge painting and you see that it's at the interior of a building and it's kind of like one point composition. the composition is super simple but basically he's like dumping ash and concrete and straw like glass all these things and is just super thick and then you find out it was the interior of a gas chamber you know and he's kind of like taking these things that like germany doesn't want to acknowledge and wants to get as far away from as it can. and basically like hold it close and then give it like that redemptive potential. you know just from making something beautiful from something so terrifying and i took a queue from that and so in that same way that he was sort of intentionally aligning himself with the nazi legacy that he is a product of i sort of want to align myself with that legacy of colonialism. settlement and a very biased image of progress for the sake of being able to take on a posture of redemption which is a very familiar motif for me having grown up in a religious environment. you know. and so that's part of the question of what is religion. like very much art is you know    : you know that ritual and everything like that. i don't know i think i went like off course a bit but i think that kind of does answer where do i get my ideas from.   : yeah this is like it's almost like a, like it's very like a kind of, it's kind of a great tragedy, it's almost painfully and conveniently too perfect you know. but i think the story might be interesting for so i don't tell it very often and only a few of my friends understand or know this in any kind of detail but when i say i became religious that's like a super simplification because it's just easier than having to bombard, take everyone's time with the truth but ok when so when i was six i had a third brother. he lived to be about six months old and he was born with a deformation, with a hole in his heart which well you probably know about a lot of stuff, my mom had chlamydia when he was and it was from that. she didn't know she did because my dad was doing whatever she was doing basically gave it to her and she didn't know. and she was also super naive. she was 18 when she had me. so she went from like home to being married and never had like a job or like a real job anyways, she babysat or whatever, but so that was really like this like it's been like this like kind of like dark cavity in my like in some ways everything that plays out in my family has to do with this you know and so she should have kind of known then that my dad was fooling around but i think she just desperately wanted to believe that that wasn't true and that i still sometimes ask her, i don't know, i don't know if i'm getting the full truth you know what i mean there are some things that are missing from the story but whatever the case is like twenty years later my dad confesses that he has been a sex addict all this time and which, there is so many ways my mom could of known but it's just like very didn't want to know. and so when they were, that was kind of like leading to their divorce. i in all this time i was about eleven or twelve i started going to church and youth group on my own. like my family didn't actually send me i met a few friends or whatever that did and i felt good being there, i had a good mentor there for a while and it didn't really get creepy until i was a teenager you know. from like between 12 and 16 it was actually really good for me. and then by the time i got into college i was actually involved in something which are actually now being investigated as cults which are interesting. so i was, i was going to this church with my girlfriend at the time and they were going to go through like divorce and i was kind of like telling them like you know go to church you know you can repair you can make it work or whatever and so they did and i think because my dad has a pretty addictive personality he really took to it and became fanatical like so quickly. so much more than i ever was. you know and then he started like praying over her to like i don't even know where he got the idea to cast demons because as far as i knew that isn't even anything i was taught as a protestant i mean that sounds like a catholic imagery to me. personally, so whatever the case was it got crazy, my mom was on antidepressants for a while and all this stuff so they, anyway they ended up finally separating and then he just became super religious from that point on. and the weirdest thing is like he never acknowledges that he started going to that church and he went the way he did because i introduced him to it because then later when we have these arguments and he's like you need to accept jesus into your heart and all this stuff and i'm like you know this is stuff i have heard before. you know this is                     : and he's like nobody ever becomes a christian and goes away from it and i'm like i have lots of friends who have. i'm like are you serious. like there is so many people, and i'm like your standing next to one. you know and he would like never acknowledge that and so there was that and in so many ways this is him not being to deal with the guilt of what he had accidentally done which is his actions led to the death of my brother which i think his thought control is very good now. it's like it's very, yeah. he never cracks.  : but i think i lost sight of the question. : yeah you know and true if you look at his father and his father before that, part of my interests too with this whole westward expansion thing that my great great grandmother was cherokee and my great great grandfather had actually purchased her and rumor what i heard was that he was such an abusive drunk that he couldn't get anyone to really marry him that he had to like buy somehow which was done i guess at the time and                                                                                                  : yeah? : yeah. : yeah. : i think it's probably true.  : (laughter) maybe yeah. yeah maybe your great great, maybe that was, who knows.  : oh ok. : huh.  : yeah. : (laughter) that's so funny. : yeah. yeah. : yeah.  : yeah. fuck authority. (laughter) : i'm noticeably fired. : no yeah i'm very disagreeable. i think anbody who knows me would tell you the same thing.  : yeah. i'm a pain in the ass. (laughter) : how old was he? : i did not know that.  : wow.  : yeah he's the most prolific. : no yeah plus there is a lot of fakes so it's hard to tell.  : but he did a lot.  : well it certainly makes me want to get in the studio and fucking get to work. (laughter). you know like jeez. i didn't know that now you just got to fucking crank it out. : you know. (laughter) : [person 1] is so much more prolific than me so that makes me worried i don't want to be left behind. (laughter) yeah what was the question.  : yeah.  : that's what you have to do yeah. : right.  : i agree with that.  : yeah because i mean like you can't i think if you were to like i don't know what proust did but i think if you sit around and you just think about something until it seems absolutely perfect then when you sit down and do something about it you are just you know destined for disappointment. i think it's just like it's an ongoing process you know you kind of work through something you work it out in the process of making it and every time you feel like you're finished with something you're dissatisfied in some way. you try to take what you think you learned and whatever you make next is somehow an improvement to that you know yeah i think you know the work will tell you the work will tell you what you need to know.     : yeah that's the question. i mean i have so many quotes i could use to like, not having to answer the question myself but : i mean you really do, i'm stealing from [artist 1] again but you just have to decide where you're abandoning it basically you know but you can overwork something too so you don't want to do that. but you know i think it's just, as you get more experience it just comes down to a feeling you know and if you have less experience it's not so you don't quite necessarily, you haven't felt that feeling enough to know that's what that feeling is. you know but i actually get high on my art in a way you know. i think it's like 90% aesthetic and 10% ecstatic. and then you're building and building maybe you have these windows along the way that feel momentarily ecstatic but that last like couple of days when something you've been spending a month on you know is, you feel like i feel like just very excited like goosebumps and like i can tell that my movements are odd and i want to do something strange and then when you feel that like you feel the peak ending it's over you know it's like then. there's also like, we were just talking and i can't remember who said this but this 80-20 rule like if, you don't actually want to bring the work to being a 100% done because there is no then there's no porousness, there's nowhere to enter for the viewer to make it their own, to project themselves into it which is why the work has any meaning because the viewer is projecting. and that 20% undoneness is what makes it, what gives it life in a weird way. sounds really generic but otherwise it's a surface it's a veneer. so you don't want it to be just a veneer.                                  : yeah. : yeah. : well like i want to do things where i like turn my back to it if we're talking about painting which is what i'm doing most of the time but, i almost want to look at it before to see something that isn't there when i'm faced the right way. (laughter) i don't know it's like a superstitious feeling. like i feel like a little bit you know how like birds move their head quickly or a squirrel or something. i feel like, like i am trying to look at it differently. i don't, i want my eyes to go out of focus in a certain way, it's not like i want things to be blurry just like i want to see, i almost want to see it all at once and then jumble it up really quickly and have it go back the way it was to test something but i don't know what i'm testing. i don't know, i don't know how to talk about this very well.  : no yeah, not as much as [person 1] does. i put it on the floor a lot.  : yeah. : yeah. i have to for some of the process. but when you are above it then you see it differently too. but this is i don't know. it feels like prehistoric or something. i am trying to communicate. it's, it feels like prehistoric or something. like i am trying to communicate with something that i made.       : yeah. : you know what it feels like a little bit though, for a lot of, i get exhausted a lot in the work you know like i get tired.  : i also get frustrated often if something isn't going the right way and i get lost in it. i intentionally create these labyrinths you know that are hard. i like that challenge you know i don't just want to, i actually do have a lot of control of the paint so if i want to i can make a realistic portrait like if i was sitting here i could make a, i don't want to do that anymore so i like create these intentional obstacles and it's really kind of sometimes i get really lost i really just don't know what to do and i feel like i haven't painted before and i have no idea. and there's something about just like exhausting yourself and i tend to work big so it takes a long time to make one that you can just feel like a release. like the brain can't, it can't really like i don't want to endure with it more like this. there needs now like some kind of surrender or letting go or something like that. you know and that's when it becomes more ecstatic. i'm not really trying to problem solve anymore. it's more like the thought and action are more simultaneous and it's i care less about what it looks like in the end and then i'm trying to get it tell me something else because if i just make it look finished in the way that i know how to make it look finished then it will be just boring and predictable.      : so it's like i don't know what i'm trying to do. : yeah. mhm.  : definitely. : well at my best i don't know the answer because it's not something i really seek to have control over. but yeah i don't think that, i don't think that good artists are uninhibited in that wild way. you know what i mean, that mythological artist way that people think they. and i actually think there is a correlation between artists who make it a point to be uninhibited and the cheesiness of the work that they make. you know like i've heard things like artists aren't inhibited, artists aren't judgmental. i'm like yes they are. they are the most judgmental people i know. (laughter) like are you serious. like fucking judge everything and everybody and they are making judgements all the time. that's why they are good at what they do. you know and yeah inhibitions. you know that's an interesting word cause i think of similar words like constraint like you know constraints are super important with innovation you know that's true too you know. of any kind it's, because there's just too many variables you know and if you don't narrow your field of vision to some degree then you are just overwhelmed with what are you supposed to do. i actually think that that's maybe a problem with people who feel creative but then they say things like i feel like i can't finish it or i can't do it or something like that. i feel like i could but i think that there probably more open minded than i am you know their more open minded, their more uninhibited and because any time they here something that's interesting they think oh that's amazing too and just added it to their collection of amazing things and i'm all the time saying that's not amazing that doesn't impress me at all like you could see right through that. like you know it's a sort of like penetrating kind of like i'm just looking for the center. you know, i'm not letting everything in.  : isn't that probably like true of most of the artists you're talking to?  : oh. : yeah. : (laughter) yeah. : mhm.  : oh. : yeah! : you're in his house? : yeah. : that's awesome. : ok. yeah. : (laughter) it sounds like an artist, we're always saying ridiculous things. yeah, i mean like if just like somebody else who's just as well known and accomplished as he is say exactly that. there's not going to be consensus like that.   : yeah. : ahuh. : yeah. : wow. ok.  : uh uh.  : yeah. yeah. : well that's funny to me.  : the whitney biennial does suck but i never thought it was douchey i thought it was just like pretentious but maybe that's what they mean by it.  : (laughter) : oh my god.  : (laughter) : i don't care about carrying a camera anymore. : huh.  : ahuh.  : oh yeah, yeah i know his work.  : ok.  : ok.  : well, gosh that's kind of an interesting question. i think i am the most proud of my ability to do the work that i am most interested in regardless of the context. wait do you want a specific project or is this more of a meta question? does it matter? : so i think for me the thing that i am most proud of working on and i try to focus on is regardless of the circumstance of the project that i am doing that i try to maintain a focus on things that are most interesting, that are the funniest or not to be thrown by a shift of context. i think often as an artist as you move into more higher status kind of projects. it's your impulse is kind of become stiff or do things in the proper fashion but usually the way reaching those contexts by doing things in kind of the wrong fashion. or in a playful fashion. or in a way that seems funny to you. so i really try to make sure i don't shift into a more conservative way of working when i go into more conservative context. i don't know why but that comes to mind as the thing that i am maybe proudest of because in some ways that is actually the most difficult as your projects advance.  : well.  : no. i mean i think part of it is you you, i try to develop some level of consciousness of where my own head is at when i'm doing things because usually if you watch how you're thinking about things you can just tell when you're kind of going in the wrong direction so i might try to notice if i'm doing a new project what do i feel like i'm supposed to do. and then i look at why do i feel like i am supposed to do that and then i try to touch back on what i want to do so i feel like a lot of my work is this like attention between sensing what the circumstances or the external circumstances want out of me in a certain condition and then measuring that back against kind of what i want to do and i think because of a lot of times i'm invited. a lot of the work i do is with museums and around questions with how audiences engage with museums. people often invite me to do projects with a certain perception of what i do that may not match what i do and i think i'm a fairly empathic thinker like i think a lot about how other people are experiencing things and i am fairly attuned to other's people's vibe or emotional state. so i have to balance that desire to do what i think people want from me in a circumstance with what i think the circumstance wants. meaning, i don't know if i'm explaining that. meaning that the person or institution that invites me to do something may not actually understand what the best thing to do in that situation is. that's the reason they are inviting me but it's very hard to get outside of that. and so i try to stay in touch with that. i am giving sort of a rambling answer on that. : i think it has to do with like you have to have some self-awareness of your own motivations and situations and be able to interrogate those to decide when that makes the most sense or not. : sure. sure.  : so i did a project for about a year at the [museum 1] where i was brought in along with a group of artists i work with to think about public engagement at the museum. and so that might be around how people experience the museum, how the signage works, how like they find their way through the space and the [museum 1] i'm sure both of you have been there. and they've made improvements on this but it's a little bit confusing to know like where you're supposed to go. and so i had designed some signage fixes for that but in the end i ended up designing this thing which was a giant hand. so if you imagine there is a scale model of the museum which was maybe this high with the occidental petroleum thing on top of it. and then on top of it was a giant hand. and then there were buttons and if you would push a button one would be where the bathroom is one would be where tickets were. one just said you and it pointed to you. so you would point and the hand would swivel and point in the direction. so it sort of solved the signage problem but it did it in a way that inverted the normal way a designer would work on something. so typically as a designer what you want to do is solve a problem and through that make the problem invisible right.  : especially a modernist design where you think of signage design as the crystal goblet through which the information is seen. so this move to make this really strange object which was very out of place in an art museum, maybe looked like it belonged in a children's museum or science museum is resolving the signage solution at the same time is causing, calling a huge amount of attention to it.  : i think that's when the work is most interesting where rather than solving a problem you kind of complicate a problem. i like it the best when i solve and complicate at the same time. so just as an example. so then the viewer can find where to go in the museum but then they also, why is there this super strange giant out of place sign here which is this whole automaton which points in the direction of something. i don't know if that's a really good example or not.                                                    : but that's an example that may be doing what the institution wants but then also doing kind of what i want then messing with it a little bit. and i think a lot of times like i'm brought in, in situations like a museum may sense they want to expand what they can do. but they don't necessarily, can't do that internally. so they'll bring me in to do that. but so as a consequence everything i do is something they haven't done before. and it's always somewhat painful. cause they don't have the way to do it or they don't know how to do it, or it's a huge amount of work for somebody. afterwards then they learned all this stuff and they can do it kind of without me but then i am often in this situation of, of, of making life difficult for everyone. (laughter) : so part of that is you have to be, you have to make people find that pleasant. and enjoyable and kind of fun. so building consensus or building enthusiasm among the people who are in an institution is part of the project as well.  : well yeah everyone wants it. that's why i get invited to do projects. yeah. : i mean art in general tends to be a complicating process rather than a simplification process right most artists make things more complicated.   : i mean i teach graphic design as well. : so i am often thinking about the distance between design and art is generally simplification versus complex, making things more complex.  : yeah, architecture is a really interesting field because it's, we think of it i mean i think there is a lot of creativity in architecture and sometimes the architects that are most celebrated are one's who are most visibly creative in terms of form. but i think we've all been in overly designed architectural spaces that don't function in terms of a machine for people inhabiting space. so i think architecture is complicated because on the surface, when you think of architecture you think of [famous architect]. the [famous concert hall]. i think that the concert hall is a really beautiful concert hall. when you are inside of it, there's all this wood, the sound is good, it feels really good. but i think that space is probably better known for its function as an image. right                            : and i was at, it's really funny because museums instead of the space the culture for expression of experimental ideas tend to be experimental in their architecture. but the condition that you need to show art often don't work that well if you have really experimental architecture. so like there's a museum in [city 1] and it's a very interesting structure but many of the walls are at an angle like this. which is not very useful if you want to hang something from it.                              : anyhow i'm sort of just rambling. what was the question. : yeah. i mean i think any, any phenomenas can be excitingly complicated by connecting to other things. right. like everything is contextual and relational so part of what an artist. i mean there's a million different ways of being an artist what i am interested in as an artist is how do i connect this set of ideas to another set of ideas. maybe in a different discipline and then also how do i play with the context of a thing to let people kind of see it in a new way. so i had done a project at the [museum 2] in 2008 where i brought 60 different artist projects into the museum over the course of one day and a lot of what we did with that was to look at. like what would happen if you looked at the entire physical space of the museum as a place where art would take place so rather than the way it functions now where there's spaces where they are very strictly defined as the art spaces which would be like the galleries and they have lighting and architecture and design for that and then spaces which are meant not to be seen. that may be like the hallway or the elevator something like that.  : and if you went in that with the attitude that any of those spaces were up for activation you might allow people to see the museum in kind of a different way. so we would do things like have concerts in the elevator or all the performances or installations might be in one really, one hallway and the galleries might not have anything in them or something like that. so that's that idea of like shifting the context from where it's supposed to take place or then the idea of connecting things to other things. so one of the project was a folk singer who was singing songs written from the same year as the abstract expressionist painting she was in front of. so if you think of like that period of modernist art is very well iconically known and folk music of that period is really iconically known but you don't necessarily realize they are happening at the same time because they're in such a different aesthetic universe so then my move there as a curator is really just doing as little as possible by connecting two things which might not normally be connected.        : ahuh. : right. : well i guess, i'm not sure. i guess what i do that in any situation i look at what are the variables at hand and i try to go through those and then find one's that people don't normally change. so i think about ok we want to do a poetry reading what are the characteristics of poetry. well it's normally about thirty minutes long. what if we did it for five days long. normally it's one poet and twenty audience members. what if there was 20 poets and 1 audience member. or normally the poet is in the same space as the audience what if he was in a sail boat and was calling on a phone or something like that. so i think i don't know if it's i guess i might have a set of strategies that i use and then i just apply those strategies to a situation but it's not necessarily remembering a bunch of things it's just like there's ways of doing things so one is like change one variable the other thing is take two things that don't normally go together and put them together. another thing is like maybe taking something that is meant to be metaphorical and taking it, doing it literally or then thinking about what is a literal thing and doing it metaphorically or what happens when you do something wrong like if someone says the wrong way to do it is this what happens when you go ahead and do that. i guess what i'm dealing with a lot, i don't also do very well with large corpuses of information like i'm trying to do more writing this year and i find that after a piece of writing gets over a certain length i just lose much ability to deal with it 'cause i can’t hold on to all the pieces. when i was teaching in the beginning i would use physical methods like i would have cards for every topic i wanted to deal with and i would just work on it on a wall i guess. i think a lot of people do that. but i think that my forte is not a strong working memory but a strong associative system. so i kind of space out and think about the things it's almost like you can make your, like any situation you can they're also things where they don't really work, concentrate super hard on them. : what was that?  : did they shift when they're heated. : oh ok. : yeah. : ok. alright.  : that's funny.  : no that's ok. i guess i do write stuff down though, in like a meeting i'll take notes. and i'll transfer those notes like i usually carry a notebook. and if i think of something in a conversation i'll write it down.      :  i think partially because it's stressful to have, every idea is so fugitive. like maybe i'm having a conversation with you and i think about oh i left my house on fire or i need to call jane or here's an idea or something. it's stressful to try to remember but by writing it down you move it out of your head. everybody does that though right?                                                                                                                   : i did not know that.  : yeah.  : oh that's interesting.  : well there's a teaching theory about that too right, like if you're going to do a break in a class, you don't resolve everything and do a break. you do the break when everything is un-resolved. so you're forcing your students brains to keep churning till they come back.   : (laughter) : but yeah i don't like that. i don't like being stressed about remembering things so i just write it down so i don't have to worry about it.   : yeah. : yeah. : i mean sometimes you know you just have a funny idea that comes to you and you don't have to work at it. you're like oh we should do this.   : right.  : right. yeah sometimes those just pop but usually just iterate through the different variables until you generate. i mean it's a lot like the cardboard exercise. i don't know if i did that well on but it's the same thing.                  : well i work very extensively with other people and i find that most of my thinking happens in some social context. like i am not someone who actually believes in going alone and working in your studio that way. i tend to bounce ideas off the people around me fairly continually and i like to get 20 people's opinion on something so i guess your question is about historically if there are people or events that have been influential in my work. i mean i think there's a few, like i had a professor at [college 1], [professor 1] who was really influential in my work even though my work is nothing like his. but, your camera stopped.                                                              : the idea that meaning, that the meaning of anything is context dependent is something that i learned from a couple of different people. and i think that's one of the core things that i am interested in is like how you then if you believe as i do if the meaning of things constructed by context how do you make more complicated context for things is a lot of what i think about. and in some ways it's a little bit oppositional to the standard move for how we think about art. so you think about what a museum does is it isolates an object in space so that you can look at it basically it's very powerful lensing device. it does that very well, but part of what happens when you do that is it really pulls it out of the social milieu or the cultural context that it happens. so i am interested in creating situations where context is very dense so i did a project last year at the gamble house. do you know this space in [city 2]? it's an arts and crafts architecturally historical home and it's considered one of the masterpieces of the arts and craft movement.  : yeah. so i did a project where i worked with artists developing performances and installing art in that house. and i was very interested in how a work of art by a contemporary artist would be seen in context of this historical movement of the arts and crafts movement. in this space which was very much not a white wall space. or the way that i might think about documentation like when we document projects i'm interested in bringing more kind of subjectivities or context to documentation rather than saying there's one film which actually shows the thing. the form singular representation of another thing i don't really buy into as a system so i'll think about ok if we're going to make a film it’s documentation of something it also will have a very developed aesthetic from the filmmakers' perspective and then from the cinematographer's perspective. so then the document tries to talk about the thing that it's representing but also has the voice of the person doing the representing. so anyways some of those ideas about context come from some of my teachers that i had at grad school. yeah.                           : i guess there was a very, i had a, i mention this occasionally in talks when i'm talking about my work historically i was in a, i was in [city 3] after i graduated from college and i was invited to be in a show at a department store at a [department store name] and each artist got one refrigerator to put their work on. and the opening of that was very illuminating because it was a friday afternoon and half the people there were shopping for refrigerators and half were looking at art. and so you had the same concrete facts perceived in radically different ways depending on your kind of subject position. right. so i got really interested in that. and that's become something i remained super interested in.        : and i like trying to think about sustaining those tensions rather than resolving them. so i think that the fact there is a tension about the art object being the center of attention and being completely superfluous depending on your viewer is really interesting so i try to make situations that are like that.  : ahuh. : ahuh. : oh. that's a context question right?  : yeah. my way of doing it is much maybe less useful culturally but i'm always like lets just add as much context as possible right? so it's, i think her question is about extracting what is the meaning of this thing in the domain under question right? where as mine is kind of like how much complexity can you build by adding as many domains as possible.  : yeah. : i think teaching is very important to me i think of my organization machine project as an educational institution in a certain sense and i think working as a curator or an artist is very similar to being a teacher in that you're basically saying here is something like interesting in the world and here's what's interesting about it. so you're trying to connect people to ideas basically. so i think as an artist as a teacher is not very different and as a teacher, i'm really not interested in being like an authority or having the information or conveying information. that's not my mission. i try to more create context for people to be creative or for people to connect with ideas and i don't know i see it as like making a kind of space rather than having something in my brain that i'm trying to put into their brain. and as i get older and as i teach more i am, i try to do less and less and less. so ideally my ideal teaching situation is i actually do nothing. i'm working towards that.                                                             : (laughter) : just sit down. figure it all out and then i get home.  : it's a, are you pretty minimalist? : yeah. : yeah. but also my teaching recently what i call curatorial anyways. i teach a performance class and the way that works is that each class meeting i bring a different artist and they do a workshop with the students and the students responsibility is to just be present to that experience as much as possible. so it might be, they might learn hypnosis from a hypnotist or they might do a dance exercise or we might do an experimental meditation or we might all build something together. and my job is to kind of pick those people so i give them a range of experiences but also to make a setting to them for them to be able to engage with that and you know you teach at [college 2] and i teach at [college 3]. those are fairly intensive like the students tend to be fairly high achieving. and they tend to think about their education in terms of deliverables. there trying to figure out, what do i need to do and how do i do it with the least amount of effort to get the highest grade. but very much about accomplishing something.                       :  and so a lot of what i see my teaching as helping them have a space that is outside of that.  : so in like the performance class they literally don't do any work. there only job is to be there and to engage in a like meaningful way with the actions. so i have to make that make sense for them. and try to gently guide them into being as invested in that moment of time as possible. so it's more like coaching or : something like that.  : yeah well that class is actually a little bit easier because the whole paradigm is that. it's, when i try to mix that in with other classes then that can be a little harder.  : but you know you get to practice that and teaching is great because it's like a, that movie groundhog day. did you ever see that it's like you do it you do a terrible job you get a terrible bunch and then you try again.  : so you get to iterate a lot. which is something i am interested in always. for any kind of creative work. yeah. : ahuh. : well i'm more of an iterator.  : i like to just do stuff. and then see what happens. i think about, i don't know. i think the process to be an artist is more of a learning process than a production process. but i think it just has to do with how your head works. you know because i think people who are in the ruminative mode of working probably are able to run fairly useful simulations in their head of stuff, right so and there is some of that if i'm planning a project i'll think about ok what's going to go wrong, i'll imagine it. i'll imagine ok people are coming, oh you know we locked all the doors, we set the building on fire that's going to be a problem at this point because nobody is going to be able to get out. so you can do a simulation in your head a little bit. but i think because i'm interested in complexity the most interesting thing is to do something and then the unexpected effects then become your building blocks for becoming your next project. so and as long as you think about what you do as a learning process then mistakes are information. right rather than mistakes.  : oh well i grew up, both my parents are college, well my father is a college professor. my mother ran a laboratory. so fairly academic household in the sciences. we read a lot of books. still read a lot of books. i, so that was good. i think and i came from a family that is very positive about learning and positive about reading and knowledge. i really did not like school. i found school very boring and the system of it was terrible for me. like i'm really not a good listener. i mean i work on it, and one of the things i try to improve as a human being is to be a better listener. but as a mode of learning it's not comfortable for me. i get bored, i get distracted, i think about other things. i have to be like doing. so i but i didn't really like, i wasn't interested in art probably until my late teens. then it was something i started doing on my own and when i got to college i just didn't want to go to class. and art i could just go and make stuff i didn't just have to like, so in some ways i think of myself as an artist because of the way that my brain likes to learn things like maybe if there was another method of learning i would be doing something else. but art is very interesting because it's a mode for learning about the world that's very self-directed. and you can go very deep into things. so the things that i know how to do are things that i taught myself so while i was at grad school i became interested in or even before that i was interested in computers so even before that i got very involved in computer programming and i taught myself electronics and i got very interested in electrical engineering so i have had other weird micro-careers. i did, i worked as a computer programmer for a number of years and i did freelance electrical engineering and robotics for a while. just because those were things where you could kind of fiddle around and learn how to do them. so and that's what i like about, i actually think there's a, i notice this trajectory in other artists of artists who become interested in technology. because it's something you can figure out, improvise and be creative about. and well, ok so computer programming is the easiest because you get lots of data back. you write a program, it doesn't work, you get some information back. electronics it's harder because it's more invisible. the testing system is more complicated. you build something, you plug it in, it catches fire, you don't have a line of debugging code. right and so people do computers and then engineering and then they get in plants because plants are also systems and they respond so for a while it was really into growing carnivorous plants. especially nepenthes which are the ones, there the pitcher plants that come off the leaves. they are from borneo. do you have carnivorous plants?  : oh you do! : so you know what's great about them if they're not happy they won't grow pitchers. so well they need a lot of humidity. : so we could talk more about but it's one of those things, is it's a kind of engineering, but the feedback system we're getting is really slow. it's not like your plant catches fire the minute you plug it in wrong and then like from there you end up with people. because people are the most complex systems and they're interesting because they can give you feedback back but they may not understand the feedback they're giving and you're trying to predict things about it. so anyway my trajectory of hacking i would say is like computers, engineering, plants and then people. and so people are kind of where i'm at now.               : i don't know there's nothing after people. you know. : yeah. : yeah. : oh well because i take an iterative approach, the doneness isn't so important. usually it's like sometimes it's time dependent, the show's opening, event's going to happen. you do the event. i do also make drawings and paintings. and then i usually my wife says i need to work on this but i usually stop when i feel like it's good enough and i'm worried i'm going to mess it up. my wife is also an artist. she tells me i need to, she's also an artist, she's like you need to work further and destroy more things so you can learn more about it. i'm trying to push myself on that stuff but i think the finishing point of things is fairly arbitrary.  : oh yeah. that's the only time, well that's not true you can do the deliberative approach where you are like ok i have to think about a hundred ideas. what are the variables. let's go through them and write them down. the cardboard box i just asked, but yeah. especially hard problems, that's well known you just have to just let your brain churn on it right? cause mostly i think, i don't know if the research supports this but i assume this is the case. like like most of your problem-solving apparatus is out of your control. right? you got a little part you can mess with and it's just like that thing you leave the problem unresolved so it keeps churning on you.  : yeah.  : yeah. : yeah. : yeah.  : yeah that make's sense.  : but you have to work all the time. you can't just not work at all and not think about things and get great ideas.  : so that mode makes sense, pulsing between the active mode and the passive mode. probably would be what generates the most stuff.  : yeah. that's interesting.  : yeah. : ahuh. : so this is the physical, this is not a metaphorical process. : oh interesting.  : yeah.  : well that's interesting cause that ties to your question about when things are done, because with that you, i guess what you figure out is how, just how far you can take the thing till it kind of falls apart. and i suppose that's what my wife is telling me. that with painting, which i'm not as accomplished at. like you just don't know where the edge is yet cause you don't push things far enough. does that make sense?  : yeah she probably knows what she's doing.  : i know.  : yeah. : i'm more failure tolerant, doing things in public with more people, i'm more failure tolerant then that. : kind of.  : kind of. i mean i get up, i make, well it changes a little bit, yeah i tend to get up and then i will, this year i'm trying to write so i get up, i make tea and breakfast then i write in the morning for maybe half an hour, an hour. then i usually meditate and maybe do email or just read for a while, and then i'll go into my office where my organization is. usually around 11 and mostly just talk with people and then i'll stay sometimes until six. and then i'll leave. and then in the evening, my wife and i make dinner and we usually go for a walk. so it's fairly routine i guess. it changes a little bit. depending on if i'm teaching or not. if i'm traveling or not. i find traveling is difficult because i'm, my routine is all messed up. i don't follow my normal habits.  : i guess i draw more in the afternoon and the evening and i write more. i think that my brain by morale at least, i don't know about my brain but definitely my mood peaks after i drink tea in the morning and then it's a slow decline for the rest of the day. so definitely my mood slowly degrades until i go to sleep. (laughter) : i tried continuing drinking tea through the whole day so i think it might be time dependent.  : so i think that generally my capacity for difficult work is highest in the beginning of the day. but i think, i suspect that's true for most people. i don't know.                    : do you find that most people are fairly routine driven?  : yeah.  : there's that charming, that book. : yeah.  : i believe in sleep.  : i'm a big believer in it. there's that book, that sort of mainstream book about artist habits did you guys read that?  : it's great, and he just uses kind of like anecdotal second sources, i can't remember the name of it, but it's like 300 artist and writers' habits.         : so it's like whether they walked, what you learn from it is that it's much better to be a painter than a writer.  : because writers always seem like i force myself to write for two hours every day that i'm completely exhausted right? almost every writer says that. and then it's like [artist 1] is like well i just paint all the time cause why wouldn't i want to, it's the most delightful thing in the world. (laughter) it makes you think wow i'm glad i didn't chose being a writer.                    : i'm sorry i can't remember the name of it but it's very. : it's interesting to read it because you project into it, like oh my god i should do that. i could do this. i could do that.  : yeah. your camera stopped.  : maybe it didn't. i thought i heard it.  : ok.  : ahuh.  : i'm not sure i understand your question completely, i mean i can just ramble on that but could you restate that?  : yeah. : mhm. : right. (laughter) : right. (laughter)  : no.  : say a cat, dog or something like that.   : instead of antelope.  : right. : well i mean i think that you generate, that's why you want to generate a lot of ideas in any process is you're going to get the lazy easy ideas out first, it's not always true. sometimes your first idea is your best idea. but generally in any situation i try to generate a ton of ideas cause that's how you can make sure you're getting to the more interesting ones.  : i don't know how that ties into inhibition though. i mean i think i spoke a little bit about that a very little bit at the beginning which is trying to be in touch with my emotional resistances or uncomfortableness or insecurities about a situation and trying to touch base with that so it's not driving me in a less interesting direction.   : i think also i'm a very like i believe, that our intelligence is constructed by the people around us so rather than our brains existing in our heads, there, we're having a conversation right. so we have multiple brains constructing a set of ideas. and so to maximize how interesting that is i try to talk with a lot of people about ideas when i'm doing them. so that's like the social model of creativity versus an individual studio kind of model. so i'll think about, i'll try to look at like who do i notice i have the most interesting conversations with? who do i like talking about things with. and i think that you can look at who's inhibiting or not in that situation too. it's like who are you trying to make laugh changes a lot how funny you can be too. : i don't know if that makes sense but. : coffee helps. caffeine. big believer in caffeine for idea generating.  : well the biggest problem is that, it is an efficiency thing because you can get into a position where you are having the feeling like you're having a lot of great ideas but you're having not actually writing anything down or                                      : like you've kind of gone too far so you have to control that. : ahuh. : yeah i have. not sure i completely believe in those but  : everybody figures out you know, it's like biofeedback. you know like everybody figures out how to get into the right mental space. it's just different for different people. you know.  : like biofeedback you have really clear indications that you can control your bodily processes. : so creativity is like that it's just the indications are a little bit harder to read. but after doing it for a long time you start to realize, what mental place you need to be in to do stuff that's interesting. yeah. and for some people that might be 12 cups of coffee. for other people it might be going on a walk or whatever but.  : it doesn’t work for me but a lot of people do that. i mean it works for a lot of other people.  : yeah it's no key.  : but i definitely believe, i know lots of people and that's how they work. i mean people watch tv as they make paintings which seems insane to me but it's whatever you need to do to tune your, tune your system.  : ahuh.  : oh.  : that's interesting. : ok. : ahuh.  : oh. and you have all of those or you have one of those categories or you're some mix.  : yeah. : yeah. : ahuh.  : that's so interesting.  : (laughter) : yeah. : i think of myself as very very very agreeable but  : yeah.  : oh that's fun. so your question is how disagreeable do you think i am?  : i mean i guess that that's my job. is to think about other ways of doing things. and i think that the way you, i think the way people experience that depends on how you pitch it. right so in any situation i would be like, like if i was remodeling your office, i would be like well here's some ideas i was thinking about, you don't have to like these. i'm not expecting you to do these but what if you did this, what if you did that, what if you did this, what if you did that. so it's not necessarily being like i hate your office because i have a vision for it, it's more like i'm trying to offer people some other things but i don't know if that really counts as disagreeable. but i don't really, i mean in certain situation you can't, you can't, people only do what they want to do anyways. right, so you can do is give them some other ideas. i don't know if i answered your question. i don't think of myself as that disagreeable.           : it was just an example. : you're a musician? : oh. : that's a weird gift. : that's a strange gift.  : oh : bring them in someone else's house.  : yeah. : for your office? : yeah.  : do you use this a lot? are you often having meetings here?  : it seems like we're meeting like this.  : to be less authoritarian.  : well no i mean that would be the purpose of having that. because you can't  : if it was my office i would want to have room to take a nap.  : which you don't.  : i would get rid of all that stuff so you would have a place to lie down. yeah i don't know why, why do you have so many diplomas up? : it seems that way.  : (laughter) i never understood that, the wall, the diplomas. it seems. : put them in a box.  : you can put them in a box.  : yeah or maybe you need a little more space that's empty. it feels very full everywhere. anyways i'm sorry i didn't mean to : i would create, : if it was my office what i would do is create an area which had much more space in it and i would find a place to lie down. but that's just like what i would do.   : in my office. you may not be, are you not a napper? : do you nap?  : try it it's awesome.  : amy poehler? : the one with the strange affect. : oh rashida jones, is she a big napper.  : (laughter) : yeah. : yeah email is a problem. this is nice i like that you have this big window and it's a little bit shaded from the intense la sun with this weird squirrel habitat.  : yeah it's nice.  : do you get your choice of furniture? : yeah. : yeah. : and you like the stacks? you're a piler. : i'm a piler but it's not good for me to do that. i try to reduce the number of horizontal surfaces.  : because with less space, you buy less stuff. so you could also get rid of this desk, and then just have a desk like that so you're not kind of embedded.  : i think you're fine though. what's your desk style? : yeah. i don't have any desks at home anymore because it just, it goes from clear to unusable really quickly.  : like if i had a football field i would just fill a desk every week.  : i mean i think i talked on the major themes like i'm interested in complexity, i'm interested in adding contextual information to things, i think of myself as someone who thinks primarily with other people, i mean do, i think doing things from a sense of like pleasure and fun is like really at the core of the work, i assume it is for most artists but, and and and i guess what's nice about working with other people is i don't particularly like socializing, like if i have to go to dinner with people i am like oh god. or but i really love working with other people. so that sense of like purposeful fun with other people is kind of my main driver  : as like an artist.  : so. i guess those are the main strokes i would say.  : um, i don’t know.  that's a great question because i usually make stuff and then i'm done with it.  so, its hard to... there's very small moments of being proud of something.  you sort of make it and its done.  then you get maybe some exterior agitation or whatever and that's nice, but i don’t know.  i'm glad that i have a job that i can pay my bills, but i don’t know if that's proud though.  pride... i don’t know about pride.  maybe you can reword it. : yeah certainly there have been many kinda, for lack of a better word breakthroughs, and then you start doing something else that is totally different.  um, i mean a lot of my work now involves knitting and there was a point when i didn’t knit and then there was a point where i learned to knit so i would consider that point a turning point when i started working with a different medium. : um, i graduated from grad school and when i was in grad school i was doing photography most of the time – and i graduated in 94 i think – and there was no digital photography or that just wasn’t an option, so i lost access to the animal dark room and i wanted to keep doing stuff, making things, and knitting kind of filled that void.  but i started because of this band, you know cheap trick.  so rick nelson, the lead guitarist wears custom sweater so i was interested in how text on those sweaters changed his character and changed the feeling of the band, so i decided to make sweaters with text.  : no i didn't,  at one point i tried to get in touch with him.  i was going to do an interview for a knitting magazine with him and i couldn’t get a hold of his manager, i don't know.  it was very much in the beginning when i was starting, so maybe now that... i don’t know i have more legitimization.  but he's not wearing sweaters anymore.  i went to go see him last year... : he just wears... you know like a kind of shlumpy guy... he just wears whatever.  i saw him at the county fair last year. : i guess a lot of people. i remember my mother when i was a kid was very instrumental because i was bored as a child maybe sometimes.  not bored.  i wasn’t bored, she would just sort of help me figure out how to keep myself busy i think.  and i think i remember when i started taking photographs when i was like 12, and i like thought you had to go somewhere more exotic to take a photograph and she was like no, the most creative people are the people that can make things out of nothing that’s just the stuff that’s around you everyday.  i remember that had a big impact on me. : like when i was a kid.  this is when i was a kid.  i was starting to take pictures. : when i was a kid?  yeah.  well i started when i was like 10 i think in the dark room and then my grandfather had a dark room in his apartment.  he was like a lawyer with a hobby so he showed me how to use the darkroom.  and then all through high school i was in the dark room.  in college.  and now i teach in the dark room. : oh wow. : um, people that i've read about.  teachers that i've had in school. : um, yeah, when i was in grad school there were a bunch of professors, teachers, instructors, whatever they're called who had a big impact on me. : do you want names?   : one thing that [pt's teacher] was great about him as a teacher was that he was always... he was always able to put himself in the person he's talking to shoes as opposed to being a dictator and i think that idea of like someone not speaking to you but speaking with you, it became really important also just as a teacher but also as a model for how to be an artist, you know that you don’t really talk down to people as much as you try to engage them.  so that maybe is helpful.  and there's a norwegian lady who collected a bunch of knitting patterns.  that was very... she's very inspirational as a person... as a woman making things and also as a... just someone i got a lot of information from her books and then meeting her later.   : well, she bought a shoddy mill in norway and a shoddy mill is a mill that takes old sweaters and takes them apart and makes them into fiber that then they make into woven blankets, and so she bought this mill and in the shoddy mill there were piles and piles, tons, i mean literally tons of hand made sweaters that people had turned in or sold.  so she started collected sweaters and photographs and sweaters and just disseminating these patterns.  but as a woman too, you know buying a mill, she knows how to weave.  she knows how to do everything fiber related which is interesting to me that she has so much knowledge.  i think she's a little bit of a witch.  and she showed me these sheep, these really specifically norwegian sheep that the vikings used their wool to make sails from.  so, she taught me about these particular kind of sheep which was very inspiring.  : yeah.  i went to norway a couple of times.  she's been inspiring.  i don’t know, that's one of those hard questions.  that’s like a question from a college entrance exam.  there's three people in history.  who do you want to sit down with?  um, who else... i mean i feel like there are some artists, not very many. : least? : why would i even need to... what did you say? : so do you need more?  was that good?  i got a teacher, a mother, and an old lady in norway.  i think it's a pretty good spread. : i can keep going i'm sure, but maybe we can move on. : yeah.  i usually go to sleep early, at like 10 ish.  maybe a little later, 10:30.  it’s a crazy day, crazy night.  i wake up early-ish.  my cats are very demanding in the morning. : just two.  but, one of them is a real... anyways i usually get up around 6, a little before 6.  sometimes i get up at 7.  i get up between 6 and 8, depending on what time of the year it is.  if i'm teaching or... like september i'm teaching.   : i don't think so... yeah they don’t get up at sunrise.  but when its warm, they're up around anyway.  but if its cold at night... maybe its because they're snuggled up in bed so they don't get up at 6.  so they're more sensitive to temperature.  but anyways, yeah.  i get up early-ish and i do a lot of putzing around i think.  sometimes i do some writing.  sometimes i answer emails.  sometimes i got to yoga.  sometimes i eat, i don’t know. i'm not very good, i keep trying to get a structure in my day but its not very structured.  like all summer i was like ill get up and write in the morning and i did for like three months but as soon as school started i was like what happened to that writing thing, i don’t know.  um, that didn’t, that's not happening anymore, but then i have a day.  i go to work or go to the studio or go on a walk or clean or whatever.  yeah.  i'm not very patterned, although i'd like to be. : well, school is school man. : yeah. : yeah. : yeah, she teaches mostly grad or she teaches undergrad? : so i'm teaching all undergrad because [university 1] is an undergrad so it's, i'm teaching, for instance this semester, black and white photography, twice a week, two and a half hours a session, sometimes were in a lab, sometimes were talking about stuff, sometimes i'm showing them images, or sometimes we're going to the library, i don't know, different stuff.  this semester i'm teaching a class about punk rock to freshman.  it's a writing course, like a core writing course. : it's fun. : yeah, every teacher is asked to participate in the core writing course called id 1, interdisciplinary 1, and all freshman have to take an id 1, so we're asked to teach about whatever we want, so im teaching about punk. : yeah, its cool.  some of the kids hate it because they want to be like scientists and are like why do we have to take this humanities course? : yeah. : yeah, well did you resent the humanities as much as ours's do? : that's why you ended up in a field where you're sort of like, you know straddling. : nice, to get her attention.  wow, how'd that work out for you?  did you get an a? : good, it worked out.  : good, sometimes that's a good motivator. : yeah, it’s a really kind of big, broad question.  i feel like and i'm just gunna go, just bear with me, that when i first graduated from school, let's say, or twenty years ago when i first started making work, i was just making stuff, and i was making a lot of stuff.  i was making stuff all the time and i was taking pictures, or i would do what was whatever in my means at the time, and so i worked at [name of observatory] for a while, so we did a zine about the [name of observatory] when i was there and it was this writing project and it was very collaborative and blah, blah, blah, whatever.  but, it was just a way of just making work as part of just the things that i did and then it, maybe 5 years, 10 years ago, i started getting more demands on the work and then making work became a lot different as i was told to make work or as i was asked to make work, or as i was commissioned to make work.  and so then it becomes different and kind of more stressful because i'm not really a part of everything you're just doing all the time, but then you may have this deadline or this expectation and suddenly it's not as much fun, so in the recent years i've been kind of making stuff because i've had to make stuff and haven't been able to do just whatever, which is where i think most of my ideas have come from, which is more just the see what happens.   so the last couple of years, or last year or so, i've been trying to go back to making that kind of work where i'm just like making stuff.  so, that was part of why i was writing everyday.  i was like i'm gunna write everyday and that's going to lead to... that's going to become a part of something.  that wasn’t. but some stuff came out of that that i'm kind of working on now.  but they feel like smaller kinds of projects.  but i feel like it's really, it's integrated into everyday life, making work or thinking critically and thinking... yeah thinking critically about things or thinking creatively.  i hate to use the word creative because i always think it's one of those words like... but i guess it’s the study that you're doing, but i think of making art as like a lens of criticality more than the idea of creativity. : whatever is you're encountering, just sort of... does that thing have a 17 minute life span or something? : some of those little cameras don’t go an hour, they just go 12 minutes. : so, yeah i noticed like with the answers to the last test today in the machine, the rat test, and these questions about what are some unusual uses for these items, i realized that most of my unusual uses are like... they're pretty confined to a small footprint of like physical space.  they're like all house garden... things i'm around a lot of the time... its not like i garden but i'm sort of in that space.  it wasn't... my thoughts were never like about the world at large as much as they were about my personal world and i feel like a lot of my work comes out of that as well as comes out of this like more domestic or more sort of just a smaller space, generally speaking and that criticality can be applied with in that as opposed with having to leave which goes back to what my mother said which was make stuff with the stuff that's around you... familiar. : yeah, because that made no sense.   : yeah, of course.  and just trying to uproot what they're about.  and maybe that's what i mean about criticality or think about what things mean culturally or in other ways.   : should i give you an example?  is that helpful?   : i've been thinking like i ride the train to school a lot and i take pictures out of the window of the train and i've been taking pictures of the backyards of people with pools and at first it was this idea of i'm just going to document backyard pools because its kind of an interesting thing and we're in a drought and whatever and just the more  i thought about it, the more it was about this idea of public space and private space and what we think about when we have a backyard and we consider a private space, but then it becomes a public space because it's seen from the windows of the train although it's seen very quickly from the windows of the train unless you have a 1/2000th of a second shutter speed in which case you can really see it and look at it later but thinking about how that extends to ideas of public knowledge about one's private affairs with digital eavesdropping or social media and the way that public space and private space are... it’s a lot fuzzier those boarders.  and so, for me, this project, although i'm not sure what form it's going to take, i've just been taking the pictures and thinking about it, is really about something that started with my experience with the domestic experience of commuting and then sort of starts to tackle ideas that i feel like are larger in a societal sense.  and with a bit of criticality.   : yeah, i think a lot of my work specifically is about connecting disparate ideas that may not have anything to do with each other at the beginning and sort of weaving them together and seeing what happens later and then maybe layering on top of that.            : i think mine's getting worse.  : but i think the digital thing killed it. : like i don’t know any phone numbers anymore.  i know my friend [friend of pt's] phone number but i can't remember that stuff. : well they also don’t know how to read a map if they go to europe and they need to get around and their cell phone data plan is going to cost too much. they're kinda... they got a paper map.  they're screwed.  : anyway, that's a different study.  that's when you're in the mri. : no, that's great it's cool.  makes us sound like what do we need humans for?   : yeah, but you're also predisposing that they're gunna have a weekend.  that their week is going to end.  so there's a bias there too.   : you can't get around it. : i think that's because now trans-humanist nazi has been corporatized and that's what google does and no ones accusing them of being trans-humanist nazi.  don't even know what they're talking about brain implants.  everyone's just like great, its google, this is amazing! : so i think its just you were on the cusp of being... anyways, so i've tried the post-it note thing... i can't do it because i just stop looking at the post-it notes.  ill do, like if i'm laying out a book, i'll print everything out and i'll put everything next to each other and i'll look at them like that, but for ideas its really... i don't know.  i've sort of recently like this summer i had no ideas.  i was like creatively dead.  i was like what am i going to do.  so i tried all of these things and nothing worked at all until i started teaching again and i was like oh yeah i have a million projects where things i want to do... but when i forced it, it didn’t really work.  i mean i found a lot of my work stems from just being around... i don’t know, being in the world.  i don’t know.  it's not... like oh i've brought you some publications and i'm going to illustrate my point by giving you these and seeing what you think.  so, for instance, i can't believe this is on videotape... so here's a publication i did called [name of book], this is a second issue called [name of book 2] and its just a review of all of my books on my bookshelf that i found that i just have all of these books, but i don’t really look at them.  so the idea was to just go through them and see what i had.  but i thought... i was just going to bring you some current publications but now thinking about it the kinds of books i have on my bookshelves and how varied they are probably part of this idea that i'm making connections between disparate things.  like when i'm thinking about the books i have on my table right now, on my kitchen table when i left this morning, i was like that’s really interesting.  i have this yoga book and this book about masks and mummying in norway like stacked on top of each other and they're both like such great ideas about body and physical presence in the world.  but anyway, so this is reviews of books on my bookshelf.  this is the second issue, the first issue there were more books.  and then this is another one.   : that's my foot. : it's a plastered cast.  i have a friend whose a foot fetishist and he offered to cast my foot and i was like, yeah why not. : no, he didn’t.  i think this was like 1999 or something and we had an idea we were going to do like a foot fetish website so we were filming and i was like oh lets take pictures of my foot getting cast... didn't really go anywhere.   anyway, so [name of book] is... : i don’t remember what's on there... oh no that's a kangaroo... its a wallet caddy actually for men in the 50's actually it was my father's and you're supposed to put your wallet in there, there's like a little thing there, and you put your change and there's a little change pouch there and your rings and your watch on the tail.  ya, i just learned what that was at a thrift store recently.  that's my mother when she was a cheerleader... : yeah... : see this is stuff that didn't get packed yet.  um yeah, paul bunyan. : it was a gift from my mother's ex-boyfriend because i like paul bunyan stories. : see [name of book 3] is gunna be crap... it's on the back... but yeah i did think of this... : yeah, i did think of it as an autobiographical way of... anyway.  yeah, that was the cover of bookshelf from the old one so i didn’t bring you [name of book] i just brought you [name of book 2].  and then the middle, the centerfold, is all the stuff that's like in the books.   : um, no.  i've opened them all. : oh, and you never open it. : yeah... those are some heavy hitters. : that's why you were called a nazi... : yeah... part of your heritage.  anyway... and those are the things that are in the books that i found. : so, this is a good mapping of my brain for you and this is a more recent book.  and this is from... i have a collection of knitting magazines because i knit, but i also have a collection of bondage magazines because i used to review porn for a living and so i started to notice similarities in terms of the representation of women and also what kind of women were in these photographs, they're not like a-list models or runway models, they're like girls next door or acquaintances of the photographer... so making that is another example of the type of idea that you surround yourself with a lot of different things and ideas and ways of looking at the world and then making connections becomes a little more easy... : well i laid them.... this is what i did.  i scanned a ton of pictures, i scanned a bunch of them, and then i just printed them all out this big and covered the table with them and put them together, the ones that fit, because they all... most of the pairs are... they fit somehow... so those are some examples of creative process. : what do you mean? : yeah, i mean sometimes it's... you know that there's a lot of great pictures of knitting patterns that have props like bicycles or trees or outdoor, so i would kind of be on the lookout for bondage correlates to that, but i wouldn’t... i'm not that organized either, so i'm not organized enough to go through all the bondage magazines and like take note of everything that's there and pick out ones that have a correlation and look at all the knitting ones and like fit them together.  that's not how i work at all.  i'm looking at five of this and five of that and then i'm distracted for two months, then i come back to it and eventually i ended up scanning them and tip for the final cut. : yeah, its weird... it’s a weird one... : it's the chair.  its always something.  this is like one of those quantitative tests, it's like what ties it together.  it’s a wooden director's chair in that case.  see, its like what is the connection? : there is, but its really about the chair.  its about the style of the chair. : i'm going to cross out my name and just write in "1017".  that's my study number. : for [name]?  do they make many of them? : yeah, yeah.  i made them the minute i got tenure.  i made them all in the school copy machine.  and bound them, we have a binder at our school now.  but i made them.   : yeah, you can keep them. : that's how i'll sign them. : that's going to shatter my anonymity. : ok, i won't do it.  i'll think about it. : that's like target with sending like people buying certain things, pregnancy stuff in the mail.  that whole thing. : i mean i guess sometimes i'll be way too critical on my process, i'll be like that’s a dumb idea, dumb idea, dumb idea, dumb idea, don’t do it, and sometimes i'll do them anyways and then they usually, or hopefully, they'll lead to something.  do you know what i mean?  sometimes you do that bad idea and you get through even though you know it’s a bad idea, so there's that.  and then i try to do new things sometimes.  not as much as i should. : just like in my life i try to do new things.  i try to eat something new or not eat certain things, like i try to change things up.  : oh, he's the flow guy?  happy flow or flow dude? : yeah, maybe not happy.  flow, creative flow guy. : well, it depends if it’s like a deadline situation and you're done when you're done.  like it's done when you have to be done.  i find that the way i work is not... i don’t know... i'm not like necessarily working intuitively in a way that you're like going forward with no plan.  i usually have the plan when i start, like i'm gunna do this book and this is a book project, i'm going to combine these bondage pictures and these knitting pictures and i'm going to be done when i have enough and if there's more, i'll do a second copy.  but i never said it's going to be a hundred pictures, but it's already like here's the project and it has certain parameters to it, so in that way i'm not like a painter whose putting the final touches as the guy is coming to take the painting to the show or things that are never really finished.  i feel like the projects i do have some sort of beginning and end or they're ongoing.  like i have ongoing projects of photographing different kinds of places that won't be done.   : i don’t think i did yet. : what was the first one again? : openness... : ok, i'm sure creative process is high neuroticism, right? : no, it's normal?  let's see the first one... i'm kind of open to new ideas... i don’t know if i'm as open as i'd like to be because i get stuck in like ruts.  i'm open enough...actually maybe i am open.  if someone's like hey wanna do this i will, i'll go do stuff.  maybe i am open... : um, it depends.  i try to be fairly agreeable but i think people find me very distasteful.  aggressive.  i've been hearing lately that i'm aggressive. : i think they're full of shit? : well, that's part of them problem.  i think i'm very conscientious.  i don’t know about agreeable.  you should ask my boyfriend.  i don't know... i've definitely been accused of being not nice.  like really bitchy.  just letting you know... what you're dealing with.  but i try to be conscientious.  what's the other one?  neurotic?  i don’t know about neurotic... i would say that i'm not neurotic.  my boyfriend would say i'm highly neurotic but i think that's because i'm jewish... so... : what's the other one?  neurotic, agreeable, open, extraverted, and conscientious. : yeah, ok. : i mean it's a great job if you have to have a job.  it’s a great job to have.  i like working with students. : sometimes it can be helpful because it reminds me of things i've forgotten about and it helps you get out of your own head and other people's stuff and then you don't get in these sort of like self-obsessed, self-absorbed canyons, so i think it can be helpful in sort of thinking about other people on the planet and what they're thinking about, so yeah i'm thinking it can be helpful.  sometimes they're inspiring too.  one of them taught me the term, gtl, the other day, it was great.  do you know this term? : gym, tan, laundry.   : so you can learn things from your students that feel important. : yeah, its heterosexual male thing.  like its a bro thing. : no, i thought it was the things you do... like do you wanna gtl tonight? : it's a great term something about male habits or priorities...anyways so yeah i learn from my students sometimes which is great and kind of keeps you one foot in the ground in some way... so yeah i like teaching. : things about my brain you should know?  i barely can't recognize people very often.  i'm very bad at it. : yeah, i have to meet people 10 times. : i feel like that's important.  you're hair was a slightly different color so i wasn't even sure that was you. : i was like she came to my studio, i don't even know if that's the same person... is that the same person? : she's waving at me, she seems to know me.  but she says its nice to see you does that mean it's nice to see you because we haven't seen each other before or because we did see each other?  and her hair was slightly darker last time i saw her... : lighter... or it was different.  i saw you had a piercing here, so i was like yeah... so anyways that's a bad thing about me and i think that makes me seem less agreeable to people because i don’t' recognize them. : yeah.  i can do that but i have a really hard time just recognizing people.  unless i have a class with three blonde girls, i won't get their name straight until like week ten, it's so embarrassing.  but this semester i have a really diverse... my punk class is only ten kids.  there's like one black man, one hispanic woman, one black man, one hispanic man... everyone's really different so it's easy. : i know, but at least its helpful.  so that's a real weird thing about, well not weird, its just a thing about my brain. : i've heard that.  like oliver sax had it.  or glen close had it. or glen... the artist supposedly has it.  i've heard about it but i don’t think i have it that bad.  but i do definitely... : i've never written any numbers on my finger tips.   : i don't really care... but i think that is a weird thing that makes me sort of crazy.  but i think people recognize me because i'm in my work a lot so they may say, "oh, great to see you," and they may have never met me, but like my art dealer who i work with is the opposite, like she'll remember any person she's known for like 20 years... like 20 years ago she might have met someone and she'll recognize them.  so i feel like in relationship to her i feel like... i don't know. : will you be able to see colors when you're listening to music and stuff... like music is very visual. : you can see sometimes when i'm listening at home... yeah.  you can see like colors or like scenes or whatever.  not huge amount.  : there might be on the internet. : yeah it's on the internet.  i see rainbows when i see video projections.  that's annoying. : projections... if it's a crappy video projector i see all these crazy rainbows. : i dont know i think i just don't like videos.  um, i don’t know what else i can say about my creative process.  sometimes it doesn’t feel like it's very creative and sometimes what you do and what you think s not creative, other people are like, "woah, that's amazing," so you have to remember to step outside of yourself sometimes.  i don't know... like your way of thinking is not everyone's way of thinking. : yeah... that's a hard thing... it's impossible to predict : hm, that's beautiful. : yeah, i think it's impossible to know what you make that's going to connect with people and that's always the surprise.  you think you made something that everyone's going to be psyched about and that's what no one gives a shit about.  and then you make this thing that's whatever... so it's always a crap shoot... yeah.   : so are we done? : i'm not sure what, how creativity differs from ordinary thinking.  i mean i... so what is someone's you know if they have... i think to be for  example, to be well educated is the ability or education you can say is you're constantly destabilizing the student so how can they stabilize and feel ok and restabilize so they come in with some received idea, you destabilize it, but they are able to cope with that destabilization.  so, to me that's about developing a student's, i'd say just their cognitive ability and also their emotional and other ideas so... but creativity i think is almost the same thing.  how does one.. how do you cope with not knowing the answer?  how do you cope with instability, novelty, and so...unfortunately what it's come to mean in the.  a lot of us feel its come to mean the opposite of what we think it is, so that someone would say, "that's... the person is so creative,"  and i'll say, "not really... that result is really... i could have predicted that result," and... so yeah.  the ability... i guess creativity is the ability to generate unpredictable results. : oh, so its linked to value.  it's linked to use. : so when you're assessing that in a student you would want to make the parameters such that they couldn’t go so far out, right.  so you say you're trying to generate often in the early years a novel response using neutral information.  like one of the ways we train them to be more creative is the information they build with is neutral.   : so, if i tell them to make a collage out of the newspaper, but i don't want any recognizable images, i want you to only cut out based on value from light to dark.  then the newspaper becomes neutral.  it's neutral information.  they think value, in the other sense the word is neutral.  it might not be, but... so that's why i l liked your test.  you got this neutral information that’s just a squiggle.  : yeah, yeah. : yes, that was cool.  i liked that, i liked that one.   : yeah, that's a big artistic problem, right?  it can't be too far out or too chaotic or no one recognizes it. : i actually use a lot of systems in my work.  you don’t see it, but i... like the color in my work is highly, highly programmed and i'm interested in how color is programmed in the build environment.  programmed by, of course culturally there are certain ideas about color but also by industrial forces, so the colors we wear or... woman's fashion is the best example.  those colors are all programmed by people they call color forecasters.  and one corporation in particular, pantone corporation, they come out with a forecast a year or two before the season and those are the colors and then they get programmed, so i've used different color programs. i've used that color program and different color programs to create my work.  so i'm very interested in that and things like the painting what i call a monochrome, meaning its only one chrome, one hue, but people experience it as very colorful, but they really like it because its all the same color.  its just a little bit more black, more white, more black and white... : they don't see... like this, this color comes from this color, right?  but the ordinary person doesn't see that.  they would say if you were wearing that and that you were wearing two colors, but, so i like, so i'm very theoretical in the color even though you would never see that in an obvious way but its quite, quite structures.  so that doesn't sound creative in an obvious way but my students are like, "what do you mean you take an existing color program and you sue that?  how is that creative?"  because they think of creativity as, you know, drink a bottle of whiskey, and just go.  if it's deliberate and considered and structured, they've been told that's the opposite of creativity. : hmmm, the most proud... i don’t know i would have to think about that one. : yeah, i'm not sure there's one i would say i'm the most proud... yeah i don’t know which one, cant say. : it’s always now.  i always think that it's now.  i think most artists would tell you that.  i always think that it's now. : so, right now, i don't know whether this will make any sense to anyone, but i'm very interested in stand up comedy and how stand up comedy and the structure of jokes... how does something become funny.  and how is that similar to what happened to what happens in language and how is that similar to what happens in the visual arts or in philosophy, so joes to me are highly philosophic, so...  : so jokes, it's always an assumption, a certain assumption, and then it sets up a certain expectation and then... so someone gets a picture in their mind and it's the reverse of that situation, so yeah.  so i like writing jokes.  so you can say, for example. someone challenged me the other day.  they said that... are you swiss by any chance?  : so they challenged me to write a joke.  they said you can't make a joke about the swiss, they're not funny. : that's what makes them so funny, so the joke was, "the swiss are very clean... so the picture is they launder money".  so you have to turn clean to the other idea of clean.  its actually like testing.  i was thinking about your little cognitive testing... the associations... and, you know, artists do the same thing, they... you have to recognize the premise or someone doesn't understand it.  if its total chaos, you don’t recognize the premise.  and then they changed the expectation from that premise just enough that people see it in a new way.  in a more open way, or more possibilities... it generates more possibilities. : yes, and it synthesizes into something people laugh at.  and i think art also has to have that kind of wit or people don’t... it gets... hackneyed or, you know, corny, right? : corny? : no. : yeah, its probably funny to people who don’t know anything about art and to people who know a lot about art, right?  those two extremes would think that joke is funny. : [colleague], did you tell that to [colleague]?  she would like that. : i didn't start as an artist... visual artist.  i was very young, i was a ballet dancer, i was into writing and in college i studied anthropology.  there's a little bit of that in my work still.  there's some social science kind of interest in my work, actually.  but at an absurd level.  and then i went to [art institute] and i studied with a lot of conceptual artists and that appealed to me that art could be... well they didn’t really matter whether you had an idea whether it ended up being a poem or a research paper or a painting or some kind of... i don’t know social action of some kind... it was all the same to them, which was very open minded and appealed to me. : huge.  it had a big impact on me.  had i not found that kind of expansive idea about what you can do... their idea was do the things that interest you and them someone will figure out what category to put you into... rather than saying this is the category, these are the rules, this is what you have to do, and fit yourself into it.  we went the other way, so you know it was the most open possible education you could imagine, so... : i would have stayed in anthropology except that i didn't like the outcome that you had to write a monograph.  i was like why did it always have to end up a monograph?  why couldn't it end up a carnival?   : i still don't know the answer to that question actually. : yeah like i like the guy who, [scientist].  [scientist] is... i don't know what kind of scientist he is... but he likes people do it yourself science.  so he had an experiment where he was trying to see... he believes that people have esp... they can tell when someone is staring at them... i don’t know if that's esp... no dogs have esp, he did an experiment about that.  but, eyes in the back of your head and so that paranoia, this sensation that someone is staring at us, is actually real.  so he has this experiment that you can do, now that i've did in my classroom many times with surprising results. : yeah, so... : yes, yes.   : no, i did it in my class!  it had controls, yes it did.  but with surprising accuracy the students knew when the person behind them was staring and not staring.  he's done it a lot... i admire him. : no?   : that's good right? : contentious... : um, in my... in general or in my own case? : yeah, yeah...um... i would say i'm both open minded and contentious.  i don’t see those as binary... or even related. : so yes, in general or argumentative... but they like it, it's fun.  and they will truly, i'm the chair of a faculty of artists, and they will disagree just on principle.  so yes, i would agree my case... i'm agreeable and not so agreeable. : well it's very important, it's very important to disagree with yourself... to... we receive a lot of ideas about art.  what it should be or what we should be or whatever.  you have to disagree with yourself and say, so basic premise art should...well ok here's one of my premises.  i think one of the primary functions of art is to increase joy.  most artists would disagree with that... but it took me a long time to get there.  i think i got there by disagreeing with that idea that art needs to be beautiful, it needs to be representational you know.  so, a lot of moves forward through modernism was artists looking at what are the received notions of what a painting should be.  and then striking them.  does it need to have color, does it need to have composition, does it need to have this?  until they got to just one or two qualities that it could have and still become that thing.  so you need to disagree with yourself and yeah.  throwing off... to throw off what's not necessary in the work. : what did he say? : yeah, it’s a problem.  i think it's a problem in all the artists.  it's too much.  too many words, too many notes, too many, that's not to say everything should be minimal.  cuz some of miles davis' work has a lot of notes. : well, generally, its very important to be with other artists, that's the key to creativity.  you absolutely have to be in conversation and arguments with other artists.  so, i worked with [mentor 1] and he continues to be important in my life... we stayed good friends and people like [mentor 2] was there at the time... : [mentor 1's] method of teaching was always interrogative.  you'd say something while... you know if a painting had to be in oil he'd say why and well aren't paintings in oil?  you know this kind of socratic method he would use.  he had no judgements, but he was interested in all students.  whatever they were doing, he had a lot of questions.  i don’t think he was fooling, i think he really.  i remember, he was completely knocked out because a student made a drawing on black paper using a slug.  and somehow she had attracted the slug to go in different directions, or no i guess the slug did whatever the slug did and [mentor 1] just thought that was an unbelievable way to generate a new design.   interviewer: it is!: yeah, it really is. : yeah, slug trails...so he did teach me to have that kind of interest and also to keep it simple, you know.  how can you simplify this and simplify it down to the paper and the slug.  especially in visual art it's... things have to be simpler and more direct than in writing other forms... so he was very important to me. : it is important to me... they have given me a lot more than i have given them i think. they say it’s the other way but they give me a lot because i teach at the undergraduate level and i like to because it makes me have to explain things in a very basic way.  and always rolling it all the way back.  so, it's very, very... it's renewing and it's fun and i like being around other artist... its hard once you get out of school, if you get around other artists, they never talk about art anymore.  they talk about money and gossip, you know the business right?  so, you can talk to students about art in a kind of wide eyes way that i think my fellow artists would be like come on, save it for the collectors.  you know, it’s the trade or whatever.  but that's very important. : that you can do anything.  the art world is an interesting place because it will accept anything as long as you are persuasive.  it's all about being persuasive, and i don’t mean that in a negative way.  you persuade with ideas and with enthusiasm and with joy and it’s the most open field... people complain about it, oh its baloney and... but really you can enter with almost no training.  art's about belief.  all art is about belief.  you can probably say that in other fields but art is really about belief.  its about making people believe... not something that's not true... but they want to believe.   : people want it. i mean this is what i like about comedy.  do you know how to tell if you're succeeding as a comic?  : exactly, its so fantastic.  it’s a totally controlled experiment... you know the experiment is right here... that's how it works.  are people responding to it... and it may take a while but... i'm not a person who says because your work sells it must be shit.  no, no the work that people buy i find quite interesting... why that?  why that now?  what's the promise of that?  so... : the market is very mysterious... who understands the market!  that's why people buy things.  i don’t know why people buy anything.  i like to think about it... its very, very mysterious.  what's more conceptual and mysterious than the stock market?  that's totally about belief! : yeah but research about it comes out and analysts come out with all of this data but how do the brokers actually decide what they're going to do? gut?   or they saw it at a trade show or... : i don’t know, it's a very interesting idea... why do people... why have we liked oil paintings for so long?  people really like to live with them to a point where i think a great service to the american people would be to get everyone an oil painting that you could live with you know because it changes and you live with it and it grows... : oh yeah, thomas kinkade!  yeah, yeah and artists, they all hate him!  but, um... : creepy and sad and stuff, it doesn’t have to look like that but, you know, why do people have decorations in their house? : i don't know... object of contemplation and i don’t know... it feels good to have that contemplative experience and then the familiarity of the same thing and coming back to it in a really good painting will change over time in different light and it’s a living thing and somewhere we know that.  people wouldn't be able to say it, but we know it.  i asked that to my students.  why do people pay so much money for these paintings and i was like well let's ask why, like really why.  why do they?  because a rich person could be buying a yacht or something?  what's the promise of that thing... so : yeah but why status object?  you know, like um... yeah, so that interests me. : yes, and don't quote me saying this, but men are better at visual art, typically.  there's more men are good at visual art.  that's not true in literature and certainly not true in opera singers and things like that, dancers... it is kind of true visual art and i don’t know the answer to that... that's for you, you could answer something like that, the female brain! : to be a good visual artist, when you work on the work... hmmm... like the ability to multitask is not good.  the ability to... visual art has to make its point in a very clear way, right?  i mean look at warhol's paintings.  absolutely clear.  you don't walk away and say, "who was that?  marylin monroe?  not absolutely clear...", you know what i mean?  its absolutely clear.  and, i think men have an easier time with that kind of clarity.  i don't know why... you probably have theories about why... the male brain... but... : that can be a fantastic kind of brain to write a novel, right?  that's great, you know, virginia woolf, whatever, these connections between things.  you know, painting with a broad brush here, but i do think that, you know my sisters in art would kill me, but there are more good bad artists in the market though.  so you have to learn, you know you have to be taught, like i was really taught by [mentor 1] who is very male in his approach to art.  what's the simplest way?  what's the most direct way?  just say it as plainly as you can... that was very american as well.  and that was great training and americans, you know for the last hundred years or so, have done very well in art as art has become more kind of like advertising.  americans are good at that because they're very straight forward.   : i was curious about artists are more extroverted? : oh, just in that category... ok. : but don't you have to be an extrovert to be an artist?  because you want to process outside... you want it outside of you. : hasn't been shown, ok. : sorry i interrupted you... : yeah, but the act of wanting to show it is extroversion, isn't it? : that's a very unusual artist.  you usually don’t know who they are because they're not out pushing it, you know.  : there would be a lot more unknowns... yeah. : absolutely, you just have to keep generating stuff and without judgements.  too much judgement in a studio is just a bad thing.  there is a [mentor 1] suggestion and i agree with it.  he just would say you just gotta keep working.  remember, anything worth doing is worth doing badly.  just keep going.  my other favorite one is all the wit, and i sell this to my students.  he says you make a plan, and usually the plan in his case is extremely simple, work to completion.  you have no idea if the idea was a good idea unless you produce the idea.  so this changing to the more extreme and go to another plan... finish this plan then go to the other plan.  finish that plan then go to the next plan.  and these people consider him to be a real thinker, a real philosophic kind of artist, but he was a big production guy.  i admire [mentor 3].  he worked every day nine to five and he said, "i'm a professional, i can't sit around waiting for a good idea."  what would i do all day!   : yeah, yeah, that's why i do... like amateur scientists to, you don't even know what the outcome is, you're gunna keep looking and collecting and looking and getting and eventually... i've not often seen an artist that doesn't have some measure of success that's actively working.   : reframe the question again for me... : habits like giving up... : left.   : right, well, i guess i can tell you from teaching, a lot of early years of teaching and early introductory classes, the teaching is really behavioral.  so one think we have to inhibit is... a student has to do something... they have to go to the toilet.  they keep going to the toilet or they keep needing to eat something, or you know, and it sounds silly but it’s a problem in your studio.  you leave, you get out of the chair... sitting in the chair is really important.  so can they inhibit the urge to run away from the thing... and i used to do this project where they have this blank piece of paper and they have to draw with ink because you can't correct it.  and they have... some are like, "can i trace it out first in pencil then fill it in?" no, no, no.  no pencils.  just go, i said just go.  it will be fine.  you can get another piece of paper.  i've seen students actually start to cry because they can't handle it.  so there's a perfect thing.  you have to be... in your studio and when you're working, you're always trying to maintain control.  things are always spinning out of control.  but, you're also trying to control the things that control you, so...i've never known an artist that would say i'm going to... its so hard to come up with ideas that they would say, oh i'm not going to do that one, not going to do that one... i think if we could choose, we would just do them all and just have a bunch to choose from.  : well, you can't see artists working in series, for example... you can't change everything on a work all the time.  so, you'll see an artist that they'll have a certain color palette for ten paintings or twenty paintings or a certain strategy and they'll repeat it and that's, that's actually a way to generate unpredictable results.  you keep some things constant.  if everything is up for grabs, the size the shape, the this, the form, its just unworkable.  so, yeah.  there's a painter i like named [painter], there's some beautiful paintings of his at the [museum] now.  i've always loved these artists that have simple strategies to work... every artist loves this.  so, there are these monochrome shaped canvases but they weirdly, you don't know why the effect you so much.  they seem familiar somehow.  so the way he works, he goes through the newspaper and he sees say someone with their arm like that, he'd say, oh that's a nice shape and he'd color it in green.  then, he'd go to the next page and he'd see, you know, some other shape and he'd color that in red.  this is his drawing process, he's trying to figure out what paintings to make.  but he had that process over and over and over and over again, right?  so there he's got the shape down and the color down, now he's got to make it.  so simple.  so, yeah... that's the most important part i think.  like if you were studying everything about creativity, like i wonder how you're doing this experiment.  how can you be studying everything about it?   : so here's a generating novelty... if you want to teach students how to generate a lot of colors... different colors... every artist has to be able to make new colors... if you get them to fill the whole shelf with every color you could ever imagine, they will not be good colors, they won't make good colors.  the best way to get them to generate a of lot colors is to say you can only use two or three tubes of paint and figure out every combination.  that guy will generate thousands of colors.  the guy who has an unlimited choice with no structure with comes up with very predictable colors.  so you see... : because, they tend to just open the tube and take whatever's in there.  they don’t... the deprivation of only a couple of tubes actually forces them to exploit the potential of those few components which are much greater than they imagine.  and he doesn’t have to think about it.  i said now you set up your components, just do whatever!  just keep mixing them.  and he's like, wow, it's so relaxing because i can just keep doing it. : well, that's been a problem when people blend on the computer they don't come up with as interesting colors.  so i have to create it... there's a way to do it on the computer.  i'll say well don’t even look at the screen.  let's start making colors mathematically because you can do them on the computer, so just come up with an equation... : yeah, and you know just hit... put things, plot things... the color wheel goes 365... whatever... minus 40 and combine those and see what happens and they're like, oh.  so you see i like the math become s a neutral system that generates novelty.   i'm big into that.  a lot of artists are in someway do that.  they come up with some structure that seems to have nothing to do with the art. : yeah, just funny stuff like this season's colors... so what would be the reverse of those colors?  and you can do it mathematically.  you just go 180 degrees on the color wheel form whatever that locates.   : it kind of bugs them.  they think somehow i go this secret knowledge... i'm like it's not secret at all... it everywhere, you just don’t see it.   : but they like it just as well because its relational.  all those, they're... the forecast... every year it seems pretty different but there's always the same components.  it's 80% warm, it's you know high value... the ratios are always the same.  it's true of people's closets too.  if most people's clothing closets are 75 to 80% warm... the warm side of the spectrum because humans, human beings as opposed to bumble bees are attracted to the warm side of the spectrum. : red, yellow, orange... : left of blues, yeah... we don't see them as well.  those are all warms! : well that's a little bit cooler but if you go into a clothing store, women's clothing store, except for black, most of the colors will be warm but there's a biological reason for it.  if the store was for a bumble bee, if they see the ultraviolet spectrum, right... don’t they?   : yeah, so they would like different colors.  different animals like different colors. :  look at all of your books... do you see all of the red ones you have there? : well, like a red car.  its bad to drive a red car if you drive fast cuz the police see it better than a blue car.  because their vision... i shouldn’t tell you this... : and 100% of the manufacturers use it.  the number one reason people buy something after price is color.  it's the same in pink, you know... : i have one, and i've done it for different experiments.  i did a series of works cuz i had the forecast a couple of years in advance and i gave it to my dealer and said people may not like all of these colors, but don’t worry they will... and they did.  is it really weird.. : well, that's interesting.  to make it really anti, you can't just flip it because that doesn’t flip the relationships, right? : mirroring, yeah.  mirroring would work.  mirroring's not going to do anything. : yeah, same old, same old... it still feels right.   : but you could do it!  but then people would not buy it.   : and the way they come up with this forecast is really crazy.  it's sociologists and politicians... i mean it's a big summit, secret summit that happens.  it’s a big, big business this whole color thing. : artists have influenced fashion and have been interested in fashion way before warhol and people like that. : yeah, color investigation... i would love that.  i love all aspects of color.  the psychological side and all that... : are you studying primarily visual artists or also writers, musicians, and... oh musicians we talked about a minute ago... : who would be an example of a person who is not creative, but smart?  occupation... : i got you... yeah. : and he's dead. : she's interesting!  and she designs her own clothing too doesn’t she... : oh, i also do that, yeah.  i'm quite good at that. : i'm a master pumpkin carver and master gingerbread maker too. : i know, i had to stop.  i had to stop i made them for my son's school and i would spend like hours and hours and hours on them.  i'd do like a monotonous building and then a replica of something... it was insane!  and sell them for ten dollars. : it was supposed to be a bake sale but anyways... any more questions for me? : the ability to generate ways to generate. : meta generation.  it has to go beyond ones that... you know... subjectivity... it has to be... a professional artist has to have a method to generate ideas and results.  so, studying artists working method is important... not just visual artists but all artists.  people always ask how'd you get that idea... how did it come to you... its like well, through a lot of generating.  now, i'm interested in comedy so i tried my hand at writing jokes so was i working with this comedy writer and he was like, oh yeah... i write hundreds of jokes.  hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of jokes.  go through the newspaper... every topic... try every topic and write a joke, joke, joke.  anyways, so that’s a way to figure out how to generate ideas is very important and being around others is very important is not to who you associate with, you need to associate with artists who are inspiring. : do you happen to know a neuroscientist named [pt's friend]? : he's a big friend of mine.  he's a childhood friend of mine. : he's actually at [university 3] but he's often at [university 2].  he's often here in america at different places doing different conferences and he studies ptsd... anyway... thought you might know him.  i'll have to tell him i did a study.  he came to my college actually and participated in some critiques.  but he didn't decide to do a study. : yeah, that’s fine. : yeah.  : um, you mean a project? uh. : no, for sure. um : i mean…when i think about what i’ve contributing thus far…like i’m…the way that i have brought seemingly unlinked strands together would be what i am most proud of. so like uh you know a lot of the work that i do engages sort of narrative in certain ways and the way that i’ve sort of brought um a kind of more embodied um presence to one’s experience of narrative um i think is what i would be the most proud of. i mean um if i think about the most recent work of mine, it’s been also the way that i’ve kind of brought this own sort of investigation into my own uh like - even sort of ancestral and family history in a way into a context in which it can be um sort of absorbed by a viewer as sort of an instance of narrative but also within the context of uh a kind of like a taking apart of their own physical experience…so it’s like melding these two things together…i mean that to me is what i’ve done the best.  : [piece filmed 1]. yeah, yeah. there are two words - there are two titles to it. a -inaudible, 5:40- [piece filmed 1]…yeah…  : yeah…  : i mean what does it do? i don’t really know….i mean i think that…i think that what that work in particular does is it sort of unsettles this notion of a kind of personal uncertainty…so and it puts the…i mean the way that piece is staged…like at least in the live version of it…it’s been presented in a couple different ways…but in the live version of it…where the audience is sort of on stage…it kind of places everybody in this space…um…the performers like myself included and the audience are sort of sharing kind of a physical space um and then there is this sort of shuffling of this kind of documentary imagery this almost sort of almost more fictional narrative that’s kind of transplanted on top of it…um and i think and then these sort of physical activities that sort of happen that complicate the image and things like that and i think that what happens in that moment um is that it sort of all of the elements are sort of available for all of us to engage with…the audience as well so it feels like this kind of it feels i mean i’m projecting…i haven’t actually sat in the audience and watched it but like it sort of produces this notion that um that we are all like on a kind of um in this sort of almost like laboratory or experimental sort of um environment where things are kind of coalescing at times but it all feels very loose so it’s like the looseness and connectedness is sort of important to kind of happen so that you…when two connections…when a connection takes place…the audience feels simultaneously as though it’s sort of happenstance and chance based and also as though it’s a very specific connection and that to me sort of mirrors part of what that piece investigates, which is kind of um well in the background i think it investigates this kind of this sort of moment and colonial migration or something or a commingling or something…which is ultimately…i mean it’s not speaking about this very well…but it’s kind of like the sort of um there’s like almost a randomness to how to globe assembles in a sort of way and how sort of personal histories come out of that sort of random assembling…it’s not random…i mean it’s obviously there’s very specific um historical and political situations that create you know colonial migration or instances of it, but there is a kind of random commingling of parts of the corners of the globe that happens in that that you wouldn’t expect and so part of that project, for me, was sort of investigating then what happens generations later as a sort of as a subject in the world when you kind of try to make links between these sort of seemingly unlinked things…if that makes sense.  : yeah, yeah, no, and that is the way that my creative process has always sort of worked…it is kind of it’s making some order out of a kind of a you know like a galaxy of somewhat disorder…but like things are kind of held together regardless in some way that makes…that holds a shape or has some sort of logic to it…but in other ways…i mean the passage way between that sort of galaxy of things can like you can form other shapes out of that shapeless sort of mass (right)  : i mean i think the randomness comes because i work…well, i don’t know if that’s random…but it’s kind of…well…random is such a tricky word because i think i intuitively move through things and i intuitively grab things and so how things take on a different weight within my work is very um that is not all together predetermined like i rely highly on some sense of intuition that allows me to kind of almost from like an unconscious level bring things into my field closer or push things a little bit away or something…um how do i make order out of things? i try to study them…i try to study every element of my work um in as dynamic of a way as possible to sort of see every element…whether it’s an image or an object or a moment in time or a reflection or whatever…i try to see it as um in a dynamic and almost objective way as i possible can…i kind of try to step out of it and then find like the things that link two things together that just present themselves to me…and maybe…and i think my entire work i mean i think when we my work works best it’s when that…there’s a sense of…there’s a sense that everything is only held together by like an invisible force that could just go away…and then we could move back into kind of randomness or something so anytime that there is connectedness…it’s actually meant to feel…i don’t know how much i’ve preprogrammed this into the work…but it’s just a result of it…it’s meant to feel very tenuous : in certain ways…i mean i was raised by two ultimately spiritual people that um that…like in a sense…i have a lot more trust in disorder than probably most people do…because i guess this invisible force that i’m talking about that holds things together…is an invisible force that i kind of believe in…so like so i feel yeah i don’t know…i feel like i was almost raised with a quasi-mystical tradition or something so i don’t…like…rational thinking doesn’t…i don’t really care –laughing- i don’t really care for rational thinking…because i just…you know…i do think that we probably…i do think that our life is kind of a continuum between um conscious and unconscious states between sort of reality as we understand it and a more kind of connected like planetary reality or something…um and i do believe that there’s more continuum between us as human subjects and the world that we inhabit and the universe around that…and all of the time of history that’s ever come before us…i do believe that there are invisible liens that i can actually kind of connect things…you know i don’t know…like i do, in some degree, and this is all very unscientific, everything that i am saying, but like in some degree i don’t think that i am here randomly, you know, i think that there was some…i don’t…i think that you know i think that there’s some reason that you and your team reached out to me…i don’t know what it is and it doesn’t even matter if i do or never know what it is…but i know that this isn’t just a random day…or i wouldn’t have prioritized coming here… -laughing-  : yeah, of course : no, i’m sure you do, yeah, yeah, yeah : yeah, for sure, yeah, yeah : i don’t know it was…i don’t know that it was being called spiritual…but i think in retrospect…i’m sort of able to say yeah… : yeah…um when i was in…i was in [city 1] before i was in [city 2]and um i was doing my undergraduate degree and i decided to take an art class…because i was studying computing science actually…and i decided to take an art class um and the first art class that i took was with this person her name is [art teacher]…it was her first class teaching at the university…um and we just had an instant kind of like connection or something…um and she really sort of brought out the side of me that was thinking like an artist already…but didn’t kind of know it…um and then and she’s one of my closest friends today…you know…um but you know…what i discovered in her um and like kind of learning about what her practice was like was this kind of um like a sort of…it was like a sort of like i think that she engages with the world a little bit like a poet which is i think is like um so and that is to say that she absorbs it all…she’s very engages in culture…she’s very engages in the technological moment…she’s very engages in the sort of presence…but then um is really sort of i think her entire practice has to do with sort of um in a way reordering things according to her own sort of intuitive logic in a sort of sense…um and so she was a massive influence for me…um i mean she allowed me to see that there was actually a lot of um there was a value in this thing that not a lot of our world places value in…like poetry…for example. um…that was a huge influence for me i think…and then i came to [university 1] and i was very influenced by people actually that were more…that were less poetic and almost more politically kind of aligned with you know histories like feminism um or you know by extension kind of post-colonial and queer studies and things like that and so sort of like i was able to just start from a place that was more almost like elemental in terms of uh it’s…like a relationship to sort of creative intuition and sort of um and this kind of this ability to sort of like uh be a poet within the world or something…but then in relationship to people who dedicated more of their career to not like these sort of universal ideas like poetry…but to more specific sort of almost political and social sort of um uh sort of understandings of the world and so um you know so [professor 1], for example, who’s kind of historical feminist that teaches at [university 1] , was a huge influence for me, um, and then, uh, and then another influence is a very, very close friend of mine that was also my first teacher at [university 1] my first semester was her first semester teaching and her name is [professor 2], and she was the…she’s been the only um person along the way that actually kind of took me aside and said and sort of showed me what i was doing with my work…and sort of like and sort of there are two ways that you work and if you want to continue working this way…which is sort of like the more sort of poetic kind of way then be a poet…like go fully into being a poet…but part of way that you also work is through this very sort of precise um uh this precise way that you kind of get under people’s skin through your use of language and your use of sort of intellect and that…to her…she was like you know this poetic route you could take it…but it might be a little more short lived in your sort of creative like lifespan. however, this other place that you like to work, could be endlessly, infinitely productive for you…and that really…and so these three influences in a weird way kind of came together for me and they’re, by far, the most, yeah, sort of significant influences on me (interesting)  : yeah…for sure. i mean i teach, so i um i teach and i feel like i’m a teacher even when i’m not teaching…you know…i think…i mean as a teacher i think i’ve kind of…you know it’s sort of like i think for young people that are beginner to think of themselves potentially as an artist…i think um in this culture which in a certain way values like especially in [city 2]…i mean there is a certain value of creative sort of energy…obviously…because of the entertainment industry…but there’s less value for un creative energy that has…that doesn’t have as defined a container…as like maybe as the industry…um and so when you can kind of teach somebody to trust their sort of insanity…or like it’s never insanity…but when you can teach them to trust this kind of idiosyncrasy of their own…of their own sort of process…of how they sort of process the world…but really try…sort of encourage…and teach them how to trust that…how to trust that sort of like that very unique outlook into the world…um that…and especially at the right age…at kind of the right time…like when we are in their young 20s or something…and you can kind of like (blow, blow, blow) you kind of stoke the flame a little bit…you know…then…you see these this kind of creative energy kind of rise up out of people and kind of take hold and see work form that feels very sort of like um enriching and i think that through the work itself but also through my teaching…you know…my biggest contribution is about this sort of uh it is about trusting the less valued aspects of human life…or something…sort of like so you know trusting the space between things and trusting the sort of like the blankness or like not thinking and not working…and trusting…you know…like the things that mostly our capitalist culture has very little value for…like these sort of in between moments or these you know in between instances…and i think that we need…i think that all i have potentially contributed is (laughing) thus far…um is kind of a celebration of those sort of like um fissures between things or something…yeah… : no : yeah. but i mean that is kind of like the argument for something like meditation, right? which is, in a way, am i correct?  : okay.  : yeah…no…meditation is confusing because it…yeah…i mean…i’m a new meditator…but yeah…but i mean…you know…but i think what you’re describing this…is kind of the goal…that is the goal of meditation as i know it…to be able to be in this sort of yeah this kind of broad awareness…where you are open and receptive in ways because you’re listening in a different way…you’re silence actually causes you…creates you to listen…not with just your ears…but you know…but then within that to be more sort of kind of focused about where your attention goes…and realize that you actually have the control like um like there’s this metaphor that’s used in meditation sometimes which is like when you first start it’s like you’re in a midst of a stream…and all…the thoughts are like you know bits of debris kind of going by you and it’s very and you are in with it you know…and it’s sort of like…it’s very difficult to control and as you continue to meditate…it’s as though you’re on the bank of the stream and you can see…you can see clearly everything kind of passing by but you can actually kind of pick something up and spend time with it and then put it back and then let it flow again…so like you have access in that sense very promising.-laughing-  : no, i see…i definitely see earlier threads…i mean i think um i’m not like a you know i even battle…i don’t…i don’t even know that i am an artist at certain points but like i…it’s hard to locate like i think i’m a…i think i’m…i think i think in specific ways…i wouldn’t even say in highly creative ways…i don’t think i’m a highly creative person…i don’t think that…but i mean that’s the funny thing when you’re an artist now…especially if you come up through the visual arts…there is such a…we have so many like sort of historical um sort of like historically important theoretical moments that um that in a weird way you come to question this notion of you know the creative genius…obviously…that’s like  a big part of sort of post-structuralist  thought like it’s…you know…um and um and so a lot of in a weird way are pre-programmed to like doubt our own…not doubt…but to not valorize our own sense of creative whatever…and you know…but to answer your question um you know before i took that class i think that i saw an exhibition in london in the year 1998 by an artist named bruce noumen who’s was a california artist in the 60s, 70s and  i had very little relationship to art prior to that um i mean i had some interest…i thought that art was maybe something i could be interested in…but when i went to see that exhibition when i was like nineteen um it was the…kind of the most profound experience of my life because it was like i without having much of a background in art…or really any background in art…and actually not that much interest in art…not as something that i would considered or pursued… i went through that exhibition and every like i can recall every work and where it was placed because i as a nineteen-year-old…it was the first time in my life that i was like oh i know every i know the reason behind every single thing in this space like i know how every decision was made. i know why that artist moved from this body of work to this body of work to this body of work. i really saw the inside of the logic and it was the first time that i'd ever been like oh wait...no this is totally what i do...this is i think what i'm doing...um...you know so because and i think that the reason was that if i looked further back...it's sort of blended partly...part of the way that i was raised which was like this kind of combination of a kind of quasi sort of mystical tradition or something...but then my father is a very...he's a doctor...he's very pragmatic...sort of science thinker in a way in certain ways and he comes from a line from these sort of like ultimately kind of like crazy people...that have...that are more sort of rational thinkers and try to think rationally about the world...about things that can't be rationally thought about like the meaning of life and creation and things like that...i come from a line of those people and then um you know both my parents kind of later on when we were kids like um sort of started to pursue meditation and a more spiritual practice...and so um i don't know like something...something about that sort of background in terms of where i came from like melded with this other um experience that i started to have with contemporary art and like i'm not somebody that goes to see like 18 century painting...and have like a major experience with it...so like i've never been someone that actually has a kind of uh you know a spiritual experience with art with historical art but to me i was having a kind of a you know extreme sort of uh intellectual and kind of quasi spiritual, and psychological, and emotional whatever experience with what i was seeing as this sort of contemporary approach or practice...yeah : right, right, yeah, yeah, yeah : for sure...i guess what really...it was that i was seeing this sort of kind of what we were talking about earlier on...i was seeing this relationship between highly intuitive sort of almost like nonsensical decision-making blended with a much more analytical thinking...and that to me was like oh this is...this is the future of the world...it has to me i mean...i wasn't thinking in those terms though when i was 19...i wasn’t thinking about you know the planet or human history and my relationship to it...i wasn't thinking about those things...now i think about those things endlessly...but -laughing- um because i also think like you know i was 19 so i had no sense of my own um mortality or sense of what a life is supposed to take on as a shape...um and i think now i obviously think about that everyday...um but um yeah mean i think it was...i think that there is also...in that exhibition it was the first time that i also sensed that there is an invisible energy that... that artist is clearly a genius like and when you see art made by somebody that's clearly a genius, like clearly, they have a grasp on some way in which the world works that not everybody has and they can translate that, um that's pretty powerful i mean that's - that's the reason that art is this sort of quasi mystical thing which is like you can't totally explain when something works...why it works so well...you know um..  : what's that?  : not yet, yeah, you’re right.  : well, but i don't know that i see...i guess i'm not...i'm not that invested in figuring shit out...like it's kind of like...i'm kind of okay with just noticing certain things and allowing them to just be. i mean in that regard i'm very unscientific... cause i ultimately think i mean you know - i had cancer four years ago...if i and you know i mean medical science has not been able necessarily give me a reason for why i you know developed stage 4 lymphoma at the age of 32...you know it's like...but it's like but in that experience i think i kind of had to really there is a part of you that just kind of has to like sort of invite the unknown and just say well i mean yeah or that or that any test that somebody can do on a body is not actually going to reveal why cancer formed in it and we're far into the game it's kind of shocking that we have as little answers as we do...i know that there is a lot of research going on and you know and i know that there is more research than treatment than the treatment options reflect because it's a massive capitalist industry and there is large part you know sick people are kept sick because it's more money to be made (laughing) but i do think that there's i do think that um in that experience um i kind of i kind of became less interested in finding answers out...uh or something...you know and just more interested in noticing things... : uh...it impacts me a lot...i mean it sort of...it's i mean i'm in a  definitely in a creative block moment and you know this last year has been um like i haven't really made anything for over a year...um...which feels okay cause i think that i'm...actually working on whatever next in some weird way...but um how does that impact me? i mean it's made the entire it's made uh my sort of the reason for the making of my work to have a little bit more um gravity in a sort way i feel a little bit more like like like a responsibility to actually to figure out what it is that i need that i really need to be working on like what my life what my life work actually is...and i think i've sort of hit on that in ways...but i'm...i've really i kind of stopped my work at a point because i was like no let's really think about this...like cause i think my work got up to a point where it was like well you are just shuffling things endlessly and you could do and if it was required of me like if like i mean art is my job but if i was working in such a way that you're required to continually outpoint...then i would just have kept shuffling things and that just would have been my career and my legacy...but i had to really realize...no nobody is actually forcing you to make anything so if you took this...and i  got a [museum 1]...so it's kind of like a nice opportunity like it's like somebody saying here why don't you just slow the fuck down and really let me know what you want to make –laughs- and...you know...and that's kind of where i've been at so but to answer that question about the...you know like the experience with cancer...i mean i think it's...it's that that also had to do with this kind of like no you only have one life and it's actually kind of short so like maybe it's worth you taking a step back and really figuring out how you are going to move forward...rather than sort of moving um through your work without, without a sense of outside purpose...you know...you know... : uh...i mean i'm supposedly in remission...but it's, it's a recurring cancer. ..it's a non-hodgkin's lymphoma that has a 90% recurrence rate so um...yeah, it's something that i deal with every day, but you know, not you just kind of have to get used to it at a point...yeah... : not currently...i...i...i did...i...i was in treatment for two and half years...so i was diagnosed in 2011 and i did six months of chemo and 2 years of maintenance therapy...but at the end of my maintenance therapy and my oncologist was like i've got good news because...i...the you know leukemias and lymphomas i feel like the research kind of moves quicker because of aids research it's quite linked in certain ways and so um so already you know after the two and half years of treatment um things had already moved to a point where the next time if it recurred i wouldn't have to go back into chemo...they could treat it with a pill...and then of course you're seeing all of these other you know sort of um i think where the future is...is...is in sort of training the immune system to kill the cancer itself...and so like there was...i just read a study yesterday about like like a way of making leukemia cells actually kill each other so like there's...i kind of feel like that is the future...i'm not...i think it's a good time to have cancer...because i believe that that i'll out live i hope i will i believe that i will outlive the period of time in which there is no cure. : no : yeah, we can do that : i mean i think of course i don't i don't necessarily think in essentialist terms in regards to gender...i think um i think that there are masculine and feminine energies in all of us and i think um you know i don't know...i mean as a gay man i don’t know how much...i mean i obviously identify as male but um i probably um  i mean that's such a complicated question because i can't answer that without thinking very specifically about the history of our...which has definitely favored men over women...i think um you know i think that if i were to you know dull out clichés which i could quite easily half of which might you know if we looked at it...might hold some water but like you know um i think that you know the...at times...you know...women artists have been more um willing to and interested in...in...in thinking about uh their own personal experiences as a kind of uh as a in a...not in a way...and also not in a...in a basic or generic way...like i think we can think about our own person experience in a very objective terms and i think that...um you know a lot of women artists um have uh a really sort of oriented things towards subjective experience as being a kind of um a you know sort of relevant and purposeful sort of place to make work from...um but that's not across the board...i mean we have...there's a lot of woman artists abstractionists that are that are not you know that are sort of and conceptual artists...and you know so...i would say that there's not an easy way to think in a essentialist terms around gender in relationship to art....um...uh but that there might be you know we might we might i just think it's also problematic to like ascribe you know uh sort of gender um you know qualities or something to work...like to say like you know women artists make emotional work and male artists make analytical work would be really stupid nobody would go on record as saying that um but –laughing- you know um but you know but perhaps there's something in that that might be worth while for somebody to explore...but...i don't...yeah...i don't know  : yeah, yeah, yeah : no, it's curious. i mean there's like...you know i think about like culturally you know i mean it's interesting like when you teach art at school...you know...it's kind of...you know it's like most of my students are always women...like in almost every class i've taught...it's been you know a higher percentage of women than men...there's definitely these kind of...but you know that's again...it's like everything i could say is just kind of a stereotype...or a cliché...or generalization...because it's like  there's you know there are you know... yeah... : -laughing- the show opens...i mean that's really how i mean...i've...most of the projects that i have made over the last 10 to 12 years have been completed simple because that's...like literally there's a deadline...but i think i use that energy productively...like i've always thought that that's actually a pretty good way to work because you could work endlessly on anything and um to know i mean of course...there are times when i've shown something and i've known in my heart of hearts that it's not totally done...not in a way that an audience would necessarily be able to see but i know it and in that case i usually like a show will open and i'll really go into a major period of depression because i feel like this unfinished thing...but then typically i'm able to finish it months down the road once the show is done...you know but and then other times you...something is finished and it's...it's sort of imperfect and incomplete but you have to accept that that's part of it's that's part of what it is...i mean i do like to think of artworks as you know sort of like mirrors of human life like i mean humans aren't perfect i mean and art should be able to hold it's humanness you know which means it's imperfection or it's in progress nature or it's kind of um uh just that it's...that what we are seeing is a moment in its life.... you know  : i know nothing  : ever...no nothing...i mean that's what...that's i think partly why i'm in a bit of a block now because i'm trying to work on a project that will take a little bit more foreplaning and i've only ever worked entirely intuitively like where it's just one step that's just made and then the next step is made in relationship to that first step and it's just like you know usually when there's a deadline...it like just like you have to plant your foot somewhere to start...when there's no deadline you're kind of like well...what if there's a better place to plant my foot...what if there's a better place to plant my foot...so at a certain point i'm going to have to very quickly like trick myself into just planting my foot...um which...will happen in the next couple of weeks...um...but um i mean how do you...yeah i mean...no i know very little...i mean to me there are two kinds of artists...i mean there are a lot of kinds of artists...but i mean i really see um that there are artists that kind of know what they want to do...they figure it out and then they just set out and they produce it and um and for me i mean i wouldn't make art if that was the purpose...cause i...to me it's like the process is where the knowledge production happens and so um and you know i don't i don't think that the reason that you choose to make art is because you are just looking to kind of illustrate ideas that came before you...i think that art at its best is actually you know in the business whatever...i don't want to know call it business...but like of, of new...of the production of new knowledge and that only comes as the result of sort of going in a little bit like you don't know you know having certain sort of intuitive or things that you trust or sort of you know things that root what you are doing but then moving into the unknown has to be a part of it or it's not worth it...yeah  : yeah, i mean that's a weird thing...it's like it's kind of like you know i think that...well i think art as a term is i don't think it's as malleable as people think it is...like i mean when people talk about art i think about the history of art and like you know it is kind of more specific and i think in this town...everything is art...or people you know people kind of want everything to be art and that's totally fine...but i just you know i think that you know i think that working as a creative producer in the industry is very different than working as a creative producer in a sort of a more autonomous way (yeah) and so i mean you're not gonna go you're not gonna you know be working for television and say like i'm totally working from the unknown...like cuz it's like that's not how it works you know but um but i would say that probably a really good you know screen writer or script writer is somewhat going into the unknown with their script they have sort of an idea and then they're using the process to kind of (yeah) to you know move around things i don't know (yes) yeah, yeah... : i think that [individual 1] is a great example of somebody that actually figures out what a project is and then executes it (right) you know and i think that her i think that the reason that her practice works and is alive and sort of you know like is dynamic...is that she is so prolific that um she just keeps doing these bodies of work and i don't necessarily think she's going into a body of work with some real sort of sense of the unknown or some real notion of invention it's kind of like no this is just you know and  so different artists work in different ways um sometimes like [individual 1]'s approach could really fail and you know could see an artist that doesn't make good work...[individual 1] saves it because something about her prolific-ness and her and her just willingness to kind of just do it just because and just trust that she has the basic skills to make a good image that’s what propels her practice you know if i you know i love [individual 1] but if i really thought like historically of like artists that really changed you know the change like the course of something i wouldn’t put [individual 1] on that list necessarily but i think she's done a very good job of pulling together strands that were available from her personal from looking at like political subjective situations or per subjective situations within the broader political landscape in the united states i think she definitely does something interesting  : i mean yeah i think that there's also like great filmmakers that have made three films in all their career so you know i just think like i think you know if that same filmmaker that made these three brilliant masterworks and then died had you know been more like a woody allen and made a film every year i mean i don’t know like would their contribution been as significant i can't really say you know i'm guessing that it wouldn’t be insignificant i think that we yeah i don’t know i mean i think i mean i do suffer with procrastination so of course i find ways to justify my own procrastination but um uh by saying like i'm procrastinating for like a good reason i'm waiting to you know really waiting for the thing but um you know i also know that to a certain extent um if i don’t label it procrastination if i don’t give it a negative name then actually for the most part the time that i've taken has been worthwhile like in between things or the hesitation i had toward starting something has actually been worthwhile and so um yeah i mean i productivity is not something that concerns me you know course i need to survive but -   :  i think partly it’s a refresh i think that partly what you want to do is or what i want to do in those moments is any connections that have kind of come about from the previous project i'd actually just like to see them like i'm really reticent to make work in any way where there's a given like i don’t want there to be any givens so i really i like to work from i like to kind of black it out again so in that time like and when i haven't taken time to black it out again i end up just making pretty much the same project i made last time with just a few other spins on it that to me that’s not that’s fine it just gets the job done when you need to because you have a show or whatever sometimes there's art that need to be made just out of necessity like this is you have an exhibition it's a great opportunity you just have to do it then there's other times that i think you want to kind of come from a more elemental place in which case this happens for every different artist i mean like for someone like [individual 1] of example or an artist like that it's like for them to take a three year break might do absolutely nothing for them it's not going to produce some grand new idea at the end of the three year break it is actually just procrastination or laziness for other people i think those breaks really are significant and when i really love to study artists over a long period of time and you look at some artists where they just there was like a five year period where like what the fuck were they doing but then you see what comes after that and that’s like oh that was the reason and so i think that’s kind of you know things can be different for everybody i think you have to know when you're truly procrastinating and when you're actually sort of swimming in some very worthwhile waters you know  : um i don’t know i mean i you know how can i tell? i don’t know you just sort of know i mean you sort of know when you're like i mean of course i think that one of the hardest things to get used to as a creative person is to i mean if i'm intensely anti-capitalist and so i think like you know one of the hardest things you need to do is deprogram yourself from this notion of productivity that sort of that if fuels a kind of capitalist model i don’t think that creativity that has to fall into that same model of productivity to be i think it can be very well served like i think if you find like if i was given a job i think i would great if somebody was just like here's your job your gonna creatively do stuff i could do it i think could i, i don’t know but i do work well under pressure when i'm pressured to do something the ideas do churn out its kind of magical how that happens um but i like to think there's another i like to think there's multiple ways of working i think that it's important to work with some sense of you know the kind of i always think of it as the pressure of public humiliation like the sort of threat of public humiliation which comes sort of as a result of having a deadline with like what if you didn’t have that well would you really spend your time thinking about so it's kind of a balance you know  : of course, it's like you know i don’t want to say it but look at the work first see what the work is saying before you really make a judgement on the character because it's like i just think you know we can't all do everything and so some i do think that human connectedness is one eave of contributing in the world and then another way of contributing is just through the work and letting the work communicate and so some people communicate very strongly through the work and their just sociopaths and like whatever that doesn’t to me that doesn’t really matter i mean i of course i have certain like you know i do believe in a certain code of ethics in terms of how people are in the world and i try to you know treat people well but i don’t know you know different people come from different places and you can only do so much with the psyche thing you have  : no, i haven't i treated the drawing test like a personality test –laughs- : because i don’t think i mean like if you tell me like to think of something that no one else has thought of before i'm just like you have to be kidding so. -laughs- :  yeah i'm sure : you know, i don't deal so well with...like i don't make models really. i don't really sketch.  it is quite appear - you know...yeah like i use a mental image a lot to organize things and like an intuitive energy, kind of image or just sort of like i always think of things as having more gravity or weight or something.  if we use that clip of footage, it has a weight that feels like this so we have to balance it over here with footage that has a weight that feels like that. even when things don't have physical weight, i see them in my thinking as holding this type of invisible shape. so it's sort of hard to do.  i don't print out a bunch of images and be like this goes here, that would just never work for me.  i work spatially, i do work in the space with things and arrange things at times, but people are always sort of surprised.  i won't have made a model before i ended the space so i just allow that sort of immediacy of experience to dictate it.  that's the most beautiful time being an artist because in a weird way, you are actually seeing that you are guided by something that you don't really have a logic for.  there is an invisible organizing principle that is sort of always there. at least for me and my work.  and i notice that with students that don't have that and i sometimes fear that if you don't have that, you might not be an artist. you know what i mean? when they can't see for themselves how to come up with an organizational logic of their own work, it's kind of like we'll that really can't be taught.  like if you don't know, then you just don't know. : i think it's a balance. i think that part of craft is actually learning what that balance is for yourself because i don't think anything can happen without a certain degree of discipline and sort of narrowing down the possibility.  but it's sort of like there have to be swells of infinite possibility that are then kind of bottlenecked into something more specific. does that make sense? like i couldn't imagine anything being done without combining those two energies. : it depends on.. if i was working on a deadline i could swell and contract a few times in one day cause you just need to, cause you're getting from point a to point b. without a deadline, i could fucking swell for several months, that's all i've been doing.  i can shove it all through there.  i think some people are really programmed to have self-discipline.  it's interesting you say that about an animal because i never think of an animal as like...can you say what you said about that?  : i often think about my dog and how he makes decisions in terms of how he organizes his day cuz dogs don't do very much.  when does he make the decision to put the toy down and stop chewing it and then just stare out the window or lie in the sun.  like how does he actually...one part of me wants to think that it's just based on his pleasure...to me that would be more how an animal would live their life because their sense of purpose is a little less defined than human. like if you have any need to be productive - i think some people have this natural, maybe it has to do with how they were raised or what their relationship to some notion of productivity, but it's really interesting seeing people with this extreme sense of discipline. the way to happiness does lie not in mindless hedonism, but in mindful challenge because i don't know that we all know that. we all don't know that. even when you do know that a certain degree of focused discipline will get you to a better place, you still pick the more immediate pleasure or some people do. : no, but i do think...i mean it would be interesting to take all of these questions and think about them within more of a cultural framework.  i think this entire idea of creativity in this context has to be bound up by what we see as cultural function of creativity,, you know what i mean?  because i.. when i teach artists i rarely...of course you meet people so often that they're like just an artist, they were born an artist, they are an artist. but for the most part, the people the make the most interesting work, it's more of a sense of they see a value in creative work within culture and they're able to see that removed and as a bit of an intellectual. so their decisions come out of that and i think it would be interesting to know within your study the extent to which i don’t know you can identify where somebody...cause i don't think i'm the most creative person in the world.  i've set up situations in which i can unleash a kind of creativity because i know it has a purpose.  that's not just my own success as an artist. i think those questions to me are interesting and i wonder to which this study is able to incorporate those things.  : when i look at the art world for the most part, i think most people operating in the art world are not really artists, they're just really good strategists that have found enough creative whatever to be whatever, the machine, the engine behind this machine.  but i wouldn’t see that in the poetry world, i don’t think anyone is faking it.  but in the art world, a lot of business people faking it as artists. : ok. : ok. : oh you have [artist 3] -laughs- : cool! [previous  (artist)] came in.  : oh is this it? : uh huh. tell me about flow a little bit.  : could you tell me about it a little? : oh yeah. yes. i read about this. yes. yes. yeah. is this the person who came up with the idea that depression and creativity are related? : okay. that was somebody else.  : oh is it?  : ok sorry. i found it kind of amazing to think about. depression and creativity share the same things. that's what i read. : yeah. oh interesting.  : mhm right.  : -laughs- in november and they become very depressed. yeah, it could be seasonal.  : yeah. it is. it's amazing.  : sounds amazing. : oh ok.  : oh wow. let's see. that's so interesting. i mean i think about my teaching as being part of my artistic career. yeah and that's what i think on some level i'm very proud of that. -laughs- that sort of first popped into my mind, my work with graduate students.  : god. that's a surprising answer to me. but anyway i think ok mentorship. i guess it's yeah i think it's our conversations. i don't, i don't even know if i think of it as mentorship but i know they probably do. i guess i'm proud of my ability to help them understand maybe the potentials of their work and i'm proud of my ability to receive art and interpret it for other people.  : hm, well vision. i think an ability to see maybe the deeper themes in their work. maybe to help them identify themselves in their work so - and maybe to be very present with them and talking about their work. i feel like i suppose when i was a student that's what i received from my teachers. little things that people would say that just felt completely right that helped me understand what i was doing and i think sometimes it's hard when you’re an artist to really, you know, to clear that away and have a language for it. i think sometimes other people can help you do that.  : oh yeah. definitely. well. yeah. not all teachers but in a certain way people who are very important to me. it makes me emotional to think about it but yeah.  : -laughs- (pause) sorry yeah. yeah. this is ridiculous. i'm sorry.  : actually, the first person that i worked with - well not really. i graduated from [school 1]. a lot of the people that i met there were very important to me but it was actually, but it was the first person that represented my work, [mentor 1], he just had this incredible ability to perceive work, to perceive art, and there is just something about the way that he talked to me actually. he sort of located me in this odd way and he was sort of known for this very deep and just this very profound way that he would talk about art and so i think you know he sort of found me even though i was kind of underground and hard to find and it was like our first studio visit. we had many, many studio visits and he was the first person, he was the founder of [mentor 1's gallery] in [city 1] in [city 2]. but before that, we had maybe about nine years of studio visits and it just, when he came into the studio and he just started talking to me about my work i just literally had a lump in my throat the whole time that he was talking, it was just a way that he seemed to express what... what i was feeling and i had never had that happen before. so yeah. i don't know. that would probably be a highlight for me.  : oh my god. there is so many artists and so many - well i mean you know my mother is an artist, painter, my father is also an artist. i didn't know my father. so i would have to say, i mean of course it goes back to that. i mean i'm sure and it goes back to my mother and, you know, i think, but i mean i'd say obviously say that she would be my first you know teacher and just the environment that i was around and the way that she sort of, you know, demonstrated what it means to be an artist and to interpret one's life, you know, one's experience and that's what she did all the time and so i sort of understood that. i never experienced a world that wasn't about you know i see this and then i make something from what i am seeing or and it's different from my interpretation and so that's something i grew up with. so i would say that's a fundamental thing. and then, also she was an art professor so she kind of trained my brother and i in a sense because i think she was a single mom and was trying to keep us sort of occupied so she would basically give us, do with us what she was doing with her undergraduates that day to keep us sort of occupied. so i got this sort of very early training as did my brother but he kind of, he was very creative but he, he felt that i was better than he was and he didn't want to compete with me. so he just stopped all of a sudden. and so anyway, i guess that was kind of a primary kind of experience also but anyway, i had this training and that's been a part of you know my experience of myself because i was developing. but mentors, certainly at [school 1],i met just incredible artists because at that time of the early 90's and late 80's, the early 90's there was just phenomenal artists, great artists that taught there. that still teach there obviously you know. and i was also working with older artists that were you know there was like the old guard and the new guard and they were kind of in conflict with each other actually at the time, but i was working with both of them and i think part of it was that i, i - my mother somehow she was older when she had me and she was more their generation and so i felt that there was value in that in a sense. i wasn't just interested in working with younger artists. so i worked with [mentor 2] who was very important to me and provided a lot of insights and i still think about some of the things he said. [mentor 3] was very important to me. she's a sculptor and i'm a painter but she really taught me, she kind of broke through a lot of the more conventional ideas i had about making art. and [mentor 4], [mentor 5], was very important to me, figurative painter. [mentor 6], again just interesting, just artists that said things to me that. [mentor 7], [mentor 8]. just great artists who just happen to come into my studio and say important things. maybe just demonstrating how, what it means to be an artist and it was a bit different for my mother and her generation. so that was expansive.   : a career? : probably pretty young because i mean i can't think of a time when it wasn't really an essential part of my sort of coping mechanism you know. so, i honestly - it's sort of the way i survived. and it was just very essential in the way that other people perceived me as well. and i remember my mother also saying in family therapy that if i hadn't been an artist, she would have been a failure. and there was something about that too that was intense for me to understand at an early age. so it all kind of combined together. there was a sense of destiny about it i guess. maybe i, yeah.  : actually, when i was in graduate school, it was the first year i was in graduate school and i felt really empty and when i was doing and i was trying to please my mother. i mean, in terms of my painting i was, she was very strong about what kind of painting was best and better and so i was like trying to paint in a way that she would approve of and it just wasn't me. i felt really like maybe i had somehow gone wrong all of these years. maybe there is something else that i can do. maybe i'm not an artist. i mean. then i but basically what happened at that moment is i sort of found myself by having this kind of crisis and then i just began the work that i have done since then. so, i guess that's the best, no i never did. never did.  : who's artists? i think that becomes harder and harder to know because i know who's good.   : just the work, the complexity. yeah the depth, the intelligence of the work. the complexity of the work. maybe on some level - i know that some people don't believe that there is such a thing as originality but some kind of thing that comes out of them that feels unique. but the difficulty is the career, is having a career and that can't be planned unfortunately and that can't be made for someone. and so that becomes - i'm realizing some students that i have had that i have just been like this one's going to make it this one's going to be important. i find that, you know, it's very hard because the careers aren't necessarily built around the quality of work sadly so.   : i think what it is, it resonates in a certain way. and there is something where the work has a kind of depth and it, it has, it stays in your mind and it just won't let go and it leaves you with a lot of questions and leaves you with this kind of haunting feeling. it just doesn't - you can't unlodge it, you can't dislodge it from your brain and i think that's, it stays with you. i think that's what what great art is. really that it stays with you. and what makes that happen i think is a kind of depth, a kind of sensitivity, a kind of complexity. um, i don't know. intensity.  : material?  : so much are often together and it's really often together that you find it and surprising ways i think. yeah, maybe it's the truly kind of somehow something you haven't seen before that way. i think that's part of it, that you just haven't never seen anything quite like that exactly and that can be. it's the invention really of the artist inventing something that i think comes out of something really a deep investigation which is that they sort of followed their own path you know to such an extent that you can't follow. you can't, can't really conjure how they arrived there.    : from the 60's yeah. that's my bedroom.  : i sleep in that room. doctor. –laughs- in the black mirrored room.  : no. : that's me.  : that is actually, i don't know if you've looked at my work, but that, that's my bedroom and this was a sight of my last body - well a body of work that was recently shown at what was called ['s work 1]  : and the ['s work 1] paintings were of former girlfriends of mine that i asked to pose. i bought this house ten years ago and i bought it really because of this room that had these floor to ceiling panels of black mirror that were installed in the 70's and three of the four walls are these black mirrored panels and i was really just fascinated by this space. felt like it was a really charged space and i just became kind of fixated on it and i felt that i somehow - i felt that i had found home and that was a weird. especially there, because it's kind of an abyss. it's a black abyss. -laughs- so i was like oh i'm home, this is my home. and i actually bid like over twenty-five thousand over asking. and there was a bidding war and i had to have that room basically. and people said why don't you just buy another house and just install black mirrors into that room? and it was because they were from the 70's, because someone else had lived in that room and had sex in that room, and you know had a life in that room and i was fascinated by the experience of the room and you can't really buy that new. so anyway, i asked former girlfriends - it occurred to me - to pose and i photographed them and then i made paintings from the photographs. and i also made abstractions that were sort of separate from the women and that related really to my father and these sort of, oh yeah. so this sort of idea of, you know, what the limitations of passion are love and all of that. so, that's what that work is and then i had that photograph taken because i there was going to be an ad in art forum and i wanted, you know my work is really based in lived experience and i wanted the room to be a part of the experience of the show. literally.  : you are comforted? : oh interesting. : and you don’t like feeling that way? you don't like to be uncomfortable. -laughs- : oh. good. well then it’s meant to be.  : -laughs-   : yeah you did. there you go. i'm glad you did.  : oh my god. what an interesting question. the difference between the work of men and women. oh my god. wow. well, i mean that's so hard to kind of parse because you're talking about the work is one thing, the careers are another. i feel like anything i say sounds so stereotypical or something, so gendered. and of course you're also talking about you know, lack of access which, you know, that could change work. you know what i mean. i just feel like all these stereotypes are coming into my mind and i hate i hate that.  : oh of course. absolutely.  : oh absolutely. there is no comparison. of course and also in terms of race that's another whole thing. i mean you know, minorities, you hardly ever see minority artists in gallery stables. i mean it's just the same. it's just as bad. so yeah. i mean sure of course the white, straight, not even straight, a lot of gay male artists that are white have you know of course some of the most important artists of the last century have been gay men. it's not - but yeah certainly white men yeah have been privileged and - but i don't think of that as the work.  : of course it's an interesting.  : the way they go about. yeah. that's fascinating. it's just so much about what's necessary in terms of collectivity and feminism and the way that women have somehow managed.  i think that's somewhat about being disenfranchised. you know that reaches community. you perform in communities because you need somehow through mass you kind of get some kind of energy going you know but yeah. but god, it's so stereotypical. but yeah i guess that sort of the personal but then i can think of artists like [artist 1] or certain artists that were men that made very intimate work, very personal work, emotional work. i mean it's such a complicated, such a complicated question. the whole scale thing too, it rubs me the wrong way but then women have made some huge pieces in scale, but often that's considered a kind of masculine approach you know this idea of kind of domination of the space. but then again there is somebody like [artist 2] who makes very intimate, small, beautiful pieces. you know, so it's sort of all over the place and i like to keep it that way in my mind. you know, i don't like those stereotypes.  : sure. : well i'm really intuitive in the way i chose to make certain bodies of work. i definitely - i don't like to think about strategies. i don't think about strategies. i am against a strategy, you know, in terms of career and you know thinking about - i'm really impractical of like profoundly so. i am kind of known for that honestly. so that's my rep. -laughs- like i take a long time to make work. i, you know, i do things like i completely change the media, you know the tools i am working with. the process i'm working with. my work is really long in process. i am doing everything you're not supposed to do.  so, my choices are basically that i'm drawn to do something. i follow a very intuitive sense of what makes it meaningful to me. and that's my guide, and i consider that the compass for every artist is their intuition. their instincts that are not something - that's absolutely the thing that you have to follow. i really believe that.  : that's a good question i think, the ideas, for me they come often, well, they sometimes come from a source, well i mean in my early work it would come from an experience i would have. i mean my work is really based somehow in experience. i would have an experience or a friend would tell me about a sexual encounter or something and i saw somehow in that a deeper symbolic meaning that felt to me like it could be universal in some way and i recognized of course if you look at my early work, that the work was very specific to homosexual experience and could really, and very marginal often, very marginal often, almost you know these strange encounters and things that most people probably wouldn't have even in our community but i felt like what was interesting to me at the time and still is, is somehow taking an experience that some might find off-putting and somehow that they could relate to it. like that to me has always been of interest to me, to take something that on the surface of things would seem repugnant or somehow completely alien and feeling like the feeling behind it becomes very familiar. so that's what has continuously been interesting and that's what the ['s work 2] also has that same kind of feeling. it's like i don't participate in a lot of the things that i paint, it's really that i feel identification with the motivations behind what these bodies are doing. so that's really how i kind of choose a subject. for me it’s that i feel a sense of a kind of emotional pull and that's how i make a choice and often an image will come into my mind or haunt me. that i have to be very attached to a image to make it. so for me it's about attachment. deep attachment and that's why i kind of will work on an image for a year or something or three years at one point i was working on paintings for three years and would only work on like one painting for three years. it's this kind of intense feeling of wanting an attachment to the object or the image and it's almost like the image is kind of like passing through me and i like that kind of deep attachment. and it's a very singular thing too it's not like any image will do it. not at all. it's the specific image and that's how i decide on an image.  : yeah that's a good question. that's a really good question. i mean it's a real problem you know cause well it requires, it's impractical, you know it's a deeply impractical thing especially now because the art world is about this kind of very fast turnover. and non-attachment i think. really disposable. you know everything feels really disposable to me and it’s like get it out, churn it out, and you know and move on and i don't think, i don't think its really, not really a desirable thing to be you know, it's not a desirable mode of operation. i, it's a very good question why do i feel the need to be so attached. it's a good thing you have kleenex in here. i think it's, i don't you know i think, i still haven't really gotten down to the bottom of it because it's too, a little too you know scary i think. so, don't want to go there.   : (laughter) see if i get over it. i don't know. yeah.  : yes.  : i do : (laughter) that's very true. often, i will have something i am working on and something hanging in the studio which is often basically what has happened. where i'll be working on a body of work for a number of years and i'll have something hanging and i'll go that's what's next. i know it's coming and i'll be thinking about it for 10 years or seven years or five years or whatever. usually it's close to a decade. and then it comes you know, i mean the ['s work 1] stuff came but not quite as i thought but it was really the same idea. the ['s work 2], the same thing. so i don't know. it's kind of a, it's like i'm working on one thing but i got my mind going on the other visualizing it, thinking about it, it's living inside of me somehow. but no, i'm not a big, no nothing i do is some pretty immediate. i do a lot of studies but i wouldn't, they are all leading up to something so. : each body is different in the sense of when something's finished but i mean with each process there's this different sense of what it means to be finished. for the early work, it was that i was really interested in luminosity and i would just bring something forward basically through many, many layers of i mean glaze basically cause i would, because i really was working primarily working with medium and very little pigment and so there was this incredible, beautiful frankly luminosity that developed and so there was like, it's almost like someone coming towards you and then they would hover there. i would put one more layer of this thing on and then it would start to kind of retreat and that's when i would stop and it was sort of like a kind of understanding of what was happening, i knew it was coming, that was almost at it's end and then i'd do one more and be like ah ok. so it would start to kind of, it would start to pull back or fall apart and then i'd stop. that was that early work. and then the ['s work 2] was more of just hitting it. you know just like reaching this thing and i, and it would be like ok. i mean like often those ['s work 2], i mean the large pieces were like a year. about a year each. 8 months to a year each. on the image, not on the actual piece of paper that i was working on, but on the image and then the black mirrors were more, i’d get to a point and i would start to live with the painting, and i'd fall in love with it kind of as it was and just like it's finished. i can't, i don't want to touch it anymore. so it’s just, it's different with each one. yeah. : ok. : yeah. oh interesting.  : yes. right.  : yeah it is.  : oh god. : no it's not, i just think it's very different depending on what you're working on. it makes sense to me that [previous  (artist)] did that and that's how she organized that book. that makes total sense, i think yeah i don’t know, it probably depends, you know, it really depends on if you're talking about how you originated an idea somehow, how these parts fit together, how you discover something, how you start with an idea and end up somewhere else, that for me is about following a hunch or following a vision just that's what happens and i'm looking at something and something will pop into my mind and i will be like oh that's what it is then and it's not, it's a different kind of something, i don't know what that is, it's different then, part of it is that, like, for the work i'm working on now, i knew i wanted to work with jeff something around japanese woodblock printmaking just because i happen to be looking at this thing that's been hanging in my studio for like almost 10 years again and i am like i was like looking at it and suddenly this idea came into my mind, i hadn't planned on it, and then i decided ok i am going to go to japan and study this and find out about it and then that led me to this other thing. it just, which is a variation on japanese woodblock printmaking, and not, it's bastardized japanese woodblock printmaking. so it works better for me it's more direct but then the source material came from my sort of searching again, hunch that i wanted to go back to gay male sexuality because i had been working with another artist who died and i had reading about aids for two years and was very moved by all that and so i wanted to go back to that and that's you know i found this material that i am working with now and i was very moved by it so that's how things come together for me. it's a different process, it's like a longing somehow, i am moved by something and i want to express it. it's probably very close to maybe my mothers way of responding to something probably, i think, direct response.  : well it's just she just, it's funny going back to this but it's like you know i would come home from school and she would be painting, and it was she worked with still life, and she worked with me actually as a subject or whatever, and it was that she had set something up and she responded to it and it was very different to what was there, and so my understanding of this somehow i think in a primary way is that you have an experience, you have a feeling and then you make something of it and i guess for me it's not fleeting feelings its things i paid attention to. they feel deep and so i want to do something with them.  : yeah. well that's exactly what your describing, i mean it is, you have a feeling right, and then you want to stabilize it, you want to anchor it, you want to make it permanent right so you make something out of it. that's it exactly, you make something out of it so it doesn't just go away you know. i mean painting is historically that. it's memorial you know, it's  : it is. it's capturing the moment. it's a memorial, even those terrible paintings outside, you know they were somebody's, yeah they did.  : yeah and we have to look at them. (laughter) and we have to look at them.  : you don't think about them but anybody else would look at them.  : yeah but you know what's important in terms of that its sentiment for your partner.   : of course not. although you know what i just found out? this is so ironic. he doesn't like that furniture. : he hates the furniture, he probably hates the paintings as well.  : no the paintings are different. they're sentimental.  : paintings are a lot different than furniture. right? : inhibition? : yeah. it gives us a lot of license.   : yes right. right.  : well that sounds like making work. it sounds like what happens well for me anyways, i don't think it's necessarily the case for everyone. i mean because, because i am a figurative artist and that comes with a certain tradition. and i relate really more to european painting, i think that often and maybe because of my training etc. or i don't know what, the first response is often not the most interesting. so it's like how do you get to something more abstract within something very conventional. like the image of a body and how do you get to the deeper thing there? how do you bring it up to some other kind of palpable more visceral presence? so yeah i think that again i mean i keep saying it but it's true, i don't know that i, i don't know, i know that what your saying i just, you just don't feel satisfied or you feel bored. or you feel you know, yeah it's not all that interesting you know to think about, it doesn't so yeah i understand, that's part of the process for me is getting beyond the first kind of ordinary, kind of things that just come up that you have to get beyond. so for me it's the process of making it so that it gets more and more abstract or more and more emotional or i am following something else and i am letting go of the sort of training, of the response but that for me is a very specific process that happens over time.  : yeah well you know, i mean if you look at matisse you'll see the same thing in his process, he'll start with the more real and eventually end with a very abstract but through all of these decisions he made over time you see something that abstract comes, he didn't start there he ended there right? he ends somewhere else.  : so i mean it's the same kind of thing, it's the same kind of process, you start with what is and you end with something that is not what is. and that but this incremental decision making that happens along the way.  : for me anyway and for some other artists as well.  : well somewhere along the way, the early work was very much about form, and then it became about trying to get into a flatter, more suggestive sense of form, almost like breathing, something about what was sensed and not necessarily seen. but yeah so i would say that but i think that i have always been interested somehow in the edge, kind of idea of an edge between the body and the world and that edge is played out over and over again in my work. a kind of inside, softness inside somehow, a kind of ambiguity and then this sort of edge that meets the world, i think that's really, if you look at the work it all has that kind of moment where it touches the world, and then there that kind of interest in that line somehow.  : yeah it keeps coming up, over and over again in different ways.  : well i don't think, i am trying to think if there is something i haven't said or that you haven't said. i think well, i mean i think that i perceive painting as emotional and i think that that's, i think the different practices, the different media have different qualities about them and i think painting is an essentially emotional practice. so i think that's where my work exists and but i think that's been kind of clear. so in a sense i don't really feel like i haven't said, or you haven't gotten it.  : yeah right. : yeah right. of course.  : yeah i just don't see them as separate at all. i mean thinking to me is emotional. thoughts and feelings to me are the same thing.   : oh interesting. : yeah.  : oh yeah! what's the difference? : fascinating. is that just from, from knowing someone? i mean do you love people that you don't know?  : right. : right.  : yeah. yeah.  : a good meal. (laughter).   : oh c'mon you have to have more stamina than that. : but still my question, can you love someone you don't know? : something about them maybe?  : it's fascinating really.  : i mean if it's a brain function.   : yes. yeah.  : right. right. it's fascinating.  : yeah. : oh interesting. do you mean all the sort of narcissistic. does it have to do with the other person?  : or the other way around. : um...yeah...i've enjoyed participating in the process so far. : oh, oh, sure : good, good, good : you have experience with this, first hand : *long sigh* that's hard. that's like asking which of your children do you love the most, and all of them are sitting in the room at the same time. i guess i could say it's probably a tie between the work that i was doing down in [neighborhood 1], the [project 1] which i worked on for 15 years and the play that i just recently did called, [play 1] which was based on the life of [person 1]. and that would relate on a personal level because i could tell the story of a person who had been historically wrong and you know, to be able to do that in a really public way was really powerful. and then the social and cultural benefits of being involved with community redevelopment through the arts has taught me a lot of lessons about what it is to be an artist and a citizen and how you've got to push against the grain. you know, you sort of get a big historical picture; at least i did when i was working in the community in that way. : well, i mean it’s a combination of both, you know, very personal, emotional and intellectual pursuits.  so from a trying to push and innovate within a field of practice being an artist, on the intellectual side you want to know that you're actually adding something to the field. i think one of the greatest things that an artist can do is to actually produce knowledge as opposed to just simply commenting on it. and i tried to do that with both of the projects, and i try to do that with everything that i do, but sometimes it becomes much bigger than me. and on an emotional and personal level, i come from a working-class background where some of the more maybe conceptual pursuits that are within the arts are kind of lost, at least in the places where i grew up. but i have come to understand that a lot of the content and subjects that conceptual, modern, and contemporary practice deal with are "common" day issues. but the way in which they express those ideas and the forms can often times become foreign or alien to broad sections of the many many audiences. so i wanted to figure out a way to be able to make work that could speak to that broad spectrum of people that recognize their intelligence, but also try to add some new concepts or build on things they already knew and thought.  so the purpose or my personal drive has come from those two things. you know? : do you mean on a content level or do you mean the level of making art an object and then making art out in a social space? do you mean how those two things meet or...? : that’s a nice way of putting it. it is historically a disadvantaged community even though before the end of world war ii, it was a thriving middle class, but a lot of those factory jobs and stuff wound up leaving and believing in that, then there was a scare of communism that cornered that unions that were fighting for the workers and these communities. so [neighborhood 1] has four projects, but those were housing developments built by the city for workers that were coming in from all over the country working to participate in the war effort by working in the [bill 1] and the air space industry.  so i... one of the things... let me pause for a second to switch gears. you know one of the things i was working on in 2008 was how do you address that question of how you can work in [neighborhood 1] and how you can make it work in the [museum installment 1]. it kind of works in a couple of different ways. on sort of a resource level, when i took over the [project 1] in 1999 and started running it as an art project, it was pretty clear that no one knew who i was, and i had no cache, that i couldn’t raise any money and couldn’t have any meetings with anybody in the city. nobody would really take me seriously. i kind of had a plan which was it would probably take me about 10 years to build a reputation where i can then direct that energy and resources back to this project. for about 5 or 6 years, i would just talk about it when i would do presentations at different places, like i would be in [country 1] or i would be at the school that [person 1] founded in [country 2]. all these different places in the u.s., i would talk about my drawings and my films and videos and i would talk about this project in [neighborhood 1].  so around 2008, when i was in the [museum installment 1], i was getting a lot of press, and then that was the time we launched it. so there's that connection there on a supportive material level. but the other connection that i recognized that resolved some of my internal conflicts about how these two different practices worked together was that creativity is a force that can be directed towards anything: a drawing, a painting, a piece of clay.  it can also be directed towards the making of a new fence or driveway or repainting a house, and to go a step further that same kind of creative force can be directed towards how you organize the infrastructure of an organization. when i recognized that the objects we were making down in [neighborhood 1] were really just the effects of trying to transform this neighborhood through the leveraging of local skills sets and working in smart partnerships with organizations and universities across the city and across the country. those were just things we could point at and say, "look at what we did," but it was really that you were doing that work so you could do it again, and do it again, and do it again. i've come to the same conclusion of why people make art and you sort of think about it. it's not financially the smartest thing that you could do, but i've come to the conclusion that people do it so that they could do it again. : it's funny cause my parents have always been very encouraging about me drawing and painting and i remember some of my first drawings that i made as a kid. i remember when i was realistically about to render a drawing of a care bear. do you remember that tv show, [tv show 1]? : yeah well they... i used to take old paper bags from the super market and cut them open and use them as drawing paper and i remember my mother being so surprised at my brothers and sisters and my parents used to be like "you did not do that? you didn't do that?! you did that?!" so that made you feel like...so that kind of reinforcement. i often times i wonder how much further i've gotten from that. so the praise part of it, that kind of positive reinforcement is one of the things that keeps you doing it in spite of the fact that there's no guarantee that the next time you do it you'll have any success. but there's also this other part of it, going back to what i said earlier, about adding something to the field; when you've done something and someone else picks it up and uses it, then that’s also a kind of reinforcement that makes it about you as being part of the social body and not just as an individual. those kinds of contributions i think go hand-in-hand with the stroking and praise you get from your parents. in my mind those are the two kind of templates. there's probably a third one which is this kind of dire and utter fear of being irrelevant and being a part of the status quo. there's sort of a great motivation that drives me to the kind of competition as well about being recognized as one of the best in my field. being in second place or third place is cool, but nobody wants to be 30th on the list you know. those are the things that also keep me going too, it's that fear. : it's pretty explicit. i've come to embrace this ethos of trying to embrace the essence of a beginner and it's a kind of a cheat in a way towards at least personal innovation, saying something is new can be a relative term, but what i've learned is that if you put yourself in a situation where you don’t know the rules and the conventions, if you haven't been taught them, then no matter what you do it will take you on some journey that will be different than what other people may have done before you. i'm not trying to be naïve but i have a criteria, i have a process of how i go about doing things and there's a criteria in there. so, i try to think of it almost like a scientific method in a way which is if you have a hypothesis then you can turn that into a theory, but if you wanted to become an axiom, or kind of a truth, then you need to test it within different contexts. so can you take that same process that you used to make a set of drawings and direct it towards an organization? can you take another set of processes and direct it towards a film or a play? and then you see what can actually hold up. which part of it is actually personal idiosyncrasy and which parts of it are something which is more archetypal and kind of truth you could say, something that is real and not just imagined.  : the youngian one? : *laughs* i had to think about that yesterday. you know, i don’t know. i guess if you ask other people, like if you were talking about my wife she would probably say that i'm a contrarian. i think i'm pretty easy to get along with you know, i can be a go-with-the-flow kind of person in certain instances, but i do find myself pushing against trends and popularity when like everybody agrees to something. then for me it makes me wonder, what are they taking for granted? what could cause so many people to agree with one thing? particularly when it comes to pop culture i'm like, where is the counter-narrative to this? i typically tend to go to that right away, and i wonder if that’s had some negative impact on my relationships within this crazy business. : well, yeah there is. i had to take a minute because i don’t know how much of it is real and how much of it is perceived.  : well, i mean a little bit is historical context is that and i'm certain that you’ve probably encountered this already. you know the arts, at least on the level in which i'm engaged with, cause there's lot of different spheres, with mine, african american participation within the arts and the international art scene is relatively new, at least on the scale of institutions and artists and critics, curators, collectors. it'd be on a recognizable scale about 30 years old, so for that reason, the community is relatively small and there's different sectors to it and at least in [city 1] there's a few power centers that exist there. i didn’t really recognize what these centers were until years later. i think there's a way in which people hold people in relationships in power, which i haven't been schooled in the art of. in certain instances you know i've either felt or witnessed myself being excluded from some of these black powered centers in [city 1]. i can't say for what reason that is, but i do recognize that in general since these things are socially driven, it has to do with a certain kind of familiarity, but also at the same time i recognize there's a certain kind of ideological divide that exists amongst marginal groups but which is not that many different places so folks can go and generally be for a forced kind of centralized rather few a few communities so you know i don’t show in [city 1] currently and i haven't had a gallery there for a long time so you know i do know that um i'm recognized in my field as being an important participant... i do know that there's a connection between my lack of gallery of representation in [city 1] to me sort of not so squarely participating in those centers but also at the same time just haven't kind of like you were talking about war having a certain kind of disagreeable you know i mean being kind of contrary and there's a part of me that doesn’t really want to be i don’t want to have to participate on somebody else's terms essentially so even though i do feel a certain kinship and appreciation for a lot of these folks, i just had to i just decided that i wasn’t going to move to [city 1] that i was going to have to build my own infrastructure for myself that was also one of those motivations for doing [project 2] too which is you know since i can't be in [city 1] and you know kind of easily tap into you know those resources then i was going to have to build great infrastructure for myself you know if you can't go there then do it do it for yourself but even greater just one of another that kind of part of a competition aspect as well : i mean i've had a number of mentors that have been i mean people i know personally like [person 2] the artist [person 2] has been a big influence on me the artist [person 3] is also based here out of [city 2] two very different artists different kinds of adventurous and they you know come from you know different kind of ideologies both of them have like incredibly loving and supportive people that have helped and nurture these different aspects of my practice um and i would say those two many artists [person 4] was a big influence on these you know he and i aren't friends any longer we're you know there's always been a little bit of antagonism there but uh he was also a big influence too  : yeah personally professionally i mean first of all i didn’t you know my grandfather was a painter i'm looking over his paints right now so i mean i grew up with art in my home um and my uncle was also a painter they both died before i was born so i kind of lived in a home where you know art that was made by people that you knew was there but i didn’t actually know what it was like to live the life of an artist like they have a studio but how did you maintain that what does it look like what does it smell like you know like you know just all the stuff that you see in movies how does that work in real life and you know they were the first to professional artists that were also african american that i had met as well but they as well like i said they come from two different sides so you know [person 3] was the first director of the [neighborhood 1] art center which is where we did our project across the street from there but you know he was a practicing artist he had a family um you know and he was sort of part of the scene and he was kind of a shaman like figure you know all these people were like when he starts talking its sounds like the birds and the music on the radio kind of falls in sync with the words that he's saying you know he's one of those kind of people you know he's like somehow the world makes sense somehow um and you know he helped me to understand that balance between you know responsible being responsible to people in need or being responsible to a community and the sacrifices that that takes and the tolls that it takes on your own individual work and i got a sense of that from him and you know kind of the economics of that life wasn't easy you know the toll that it played on you him deciding to stay in [city 2] to be with his daughter and his wife um had a big effect on how on his recognition so like [person 5] who was a contemporary of his left went to [city 1] he actually left his family behind and is now recognizable in the most significant artisan in the world and you know [person 3] doesn't have that recognition you know he was some now but you know he's in his mid to late 80s and you know his health isn't great so you know i kind of had a picture of what life was like when you decided to have a regular life and not sort of live the bohemian artist lifestyle that his friend did now [person 2] is a conceptual artist who is probably 10 years younger than [person 3] you know both born in [region 1] [person 3] never gave what part of [region 1] he came from um and [person 2] is from [state 1] no he came from [state 2] i believe so [person 2] was teaching at [college 2] and he's really a theoretician he teaches um the he teaches like post-colonial theory he teaches about logic and um you know about uh linguistics and um french theory so he was the first person that i met whose big leap in late was his mind work was similar to my own um because you know the pressure that i recognized when i got into art school was that it was pressure to make work about your identity and i i wasn't really into that um and he was the one that helped me to understand that my interest for beauty epistemologically based like that i was really interested in understanding the limits of what he could know and the limits of the tools that we use to understand things so it was more like kind of metaphysical interest but i didn't have a language for it i didn’t have a theoretical mind or even art historical reference for it so he was a kind of living breathing example of what an artist practice could be but on a personal level and career path point that he was in his career he was kind of on the downward swing and his career kind of stagnated at the time after he was a real hotshot artist in [city 1] so and that him you know he was focusing on his teaching and his writing and was you know just incredibly supportive i mean in a way that really um showed me the dignity that one could have even when you weren't when you were being undervalued and not giving up um so you know i was afforded to kind of have these two sides um and try to figure out my own path um that i would be able to have something that with these gentlemen had done  : oh yeah yeah i do i've done consistently since i became a college student a good portion of my friends or people that i've either mentored or have been mentored by or helped in some way or they helped me in some way that's pretty much the only people that are in my life to be honest  : well you know i try to often times i give people advice and they're not even asking for it so you know personally that so you know what i hope to give them what they get may not necessarily correlate but you know i just think i just try to talk about the things i wish that somebody would have said to me or shared the things that people today you know for one it's important that people recognize that the success that they have and the production of their work um may not necessarily correlate with the success that they have um with the quality of their work correlate with the success that they had these things can be arbitrary um that these windows can align themselves un-align themselves and it's not something you can necessarily control um so you know kind of having a deeper faith in the process and trying to stay connected to what's important within the time that you live and to try to you know inject some something into that is suddenly you got to hold on to especially that’s kind of the deeper philosophical part and then i you know i try to say things to people that reinforce their connections to the community around them so that they don’t feel isolated they don't feel alone which is often times the result of working in the studio by yourself and then you know i try to connect people together or try to connect folks to resources that they might not know is available to them kind of like you know like doing a blind date kind of thing oh hey you know to meet this person a so that so that's why i was so good working at watts because being able to connect people together especially if it's not for me you know if i'm doing it for myself i'm not so great at it but um doing i for others you know i'm pretty awesome  : uhhh i say yes and no um the yes part of it, it also is a no the no is that again this whole quality versus success thing is very strange thing um this is a tad digression so i was in [city 3] last summer for the fine you know and [person 2]'s  is career now on a great upswing and you know he's getting all the accolades and recognition he deserves  all those years you know there on the phone with him because he was somewhere we were chatting i said how does it feel you know and he goes well you know i don’t think i can attribute any grand narrative to this because as soon as you analyze it all just kind of falls apart you know he says you know i just feel really grateful that i've had the opportunity to be in an important player in the field again you know to have this happen a second time is a gift um so from his perspective you know he's not certain what to attribute it to now as someone who was actively participating and talking about him you know on a regular basis for years um i attribute it to a kind of larger arc that maybe you could call just um and by that i mean that you know [person 2] was constantly adding concepts and paradigms to the field that i know made people better thinkers and that he was a the genuinely supportive and you know kind of a beautiful model of what an artist could be um so you know some people who aren't any of those qualities can do well still don’t have any of those qualities can do well still um well as far as his contribution part is just kind of muddy waters bunch of crap but some people you can meet and you can just tell that they have a kind of  i don't know moxie they have gumption they have a they um a had a mental toughness to kind of stay with the you know be able to ride the crests and the waves, the highs and the lows um i don’t know you can just kind of sometimes you can tell just once : can you explain the concept one more time  : yeah  : right right right right yeah yeah um oh you know what i thought of just now i'm going to answer your question  but i just want to say you know the reason why i decided to be in the study because i figured i can learn something from... sounds like that much i'm hoping anyways this conversation is creative i just wanted to sort of recognize that well i'm going to see if i can answer this question in a non complicated way i think there's a couple different ways to store concepts um and i think that one of them is in time and the other one is space so the space one is where you got to write it down you have to hold you have to sort of turn it into a concrete thing so it doesn’t float away and the other way to hold on to concepts is to mark it in a certain kind of circumstance and see if it comes back around again and part of that is has to do with certain conditions of where you are at any given moment so i'll give you an example so i was in the car coming back from [airport 1] yesterday and [podcast 1] was on and there's this great episode that they did on synecdoche which is probably you're familiar with emergence theory but for me that was like a really fundamental set of um paradigms that have driven my work for years and that was one of the ways of working in [neighborhood 1] that i've tried to bring to the organization you know that you can build an organization that can be responsive to the changing dynamics of a neighborhood but you know when i left the organization in 2012 it was under some controversy and um it was a lot of conflict there there's still some this was like 4 years ago and that conflict really consumed my deeper philosophical reasons i was that i was trying to do it in a way which i was because you know you're under scrutiny you're under attack you defend yourself and things become pretty black and white so you know there was [podcast 1] episodes around reemergence were really important for me and it was yesterday when i was riding in the car and i wrote it down i was like i said to myself you know this is so great that this came back around because right now i'm writing i'm trying to write about it trying to turn it into a book and stuff about the work we did down in [neighborhood 1] and um so you know that was kind of an example of me holding on to something um a concept in time you know sort of with the belief that you know that even if i forgot about it it was going to come back again because it was so core to my values you know um so now i'm going to do something with it : oh i have never seen that movie it was on like two on netflix for a month and it seemed like it would be long and depressing so i never watched it : its not i'll have to watch it  : yeah : like its like 3 hours long : [interviewer 1] at the risk of sort of being too long winded let me say this other thing is that um a lot of the things that drive me to work in certain subjects is um is coincidence and chance um events like you know the emergence thing coming on the radio and all these memories coming back or my early work or early drawings would be based on people mentioning the same thing within the same day you know or you know me want to make a drawing about [person 6] and [person 7] do [person 8] and some [movie 2] my brother mentioning [person 7]'s recording at the same time and you know sort of like a lot of times you know i use chance as a way of as a way to kind of to not let ideas get trapped in just one way of reading and so like me holding on to concepts and you know the kind in the spatial way holding on to these nuggets is something that i do constantly and then see how they connect together often times triggered by chance and that  : yeah i could see that i probably do a little bit of both um i think that the projects that i like the least are the ones that have been the most kind of riddled with doubt and didn’t probably give myself enough time to um to really think it through um so you know producing things quickly um often times you know i was doing it because i was kind of playing out a part in my head oh this is what art is constituted become you know kind of reset next level of recognition and i've probably lost um at least in my own kind of assessment at least that i've kind of lost something in each it probably 50 % that i've done that um and the other stuff is just kind of mediocre and then just shows that have been so bombs and then you know things incubating over time is a matter of a kind of man either its circumstance where you can't make it because you don't have the resources to do it or you know you have a certain kind of deliberate practice where you really just give yourself to time to make sure you get it out there in the right way and now i'm 44 and i don’t think my career's going to end tomorrow anymore um i'm willing to give myself a little more time and be more thoughtful about my decisions um but you know at the same i'm generally not the most diligent worker so you know if i could take a day off i will if i could push something off i will f i could go see a movie i will but what i think is interesting is this me kind of like winding back the spring you know there's more to actually get started than you just like walk into it and just kind of manic and i work like really intensely 12-14 hour days and i could do that for weeks and then i'll take you know months off and if i can i'll avoid working on a new project because they are kind of painful to get it started  : yeah i think it depends on the persons temperament and i mean there are some folks that work being an artist as a 9-5 you know like i kind of call these the day workers you know like they are you know they're like you know like [person 9] is one of these people or you know the artist [person 10] is one of these people where you know they start at a certain hour or you know [person 11] was one of these people and um you know and when i look at them and i look at me and i go oh maybe that’s the reason why you know they're further along than me but i don’t know if i just say that just to kind of make myself feel better um but you know the inhibition that i often encounter is time that i haven't enough of it and then you find yourself kind of pushing yourself in ways and you know making leaps in ways that you might not have if you didn’t have if you had all the time in the world and maybe you know i'm sometimes i tell myself is to give me a false sense of importance or relevance to it its gotta get done by this time because if i don’t then you know world's going to come to an end you know no that um like me personally time usually is being the main issue or not having enough money so you got to figure out another way to do it but you know i do think that there are certain kinds of of um hurdles or challenges that are not useful to the creative process these are over long periods of time and i think that particularly one of the things that's plaguing a lot of artists today is the dead ratio to income because student loans you know i think that as a kind of within the larger trend of production that is really pushed people increasingly towards making marketable kind of banal work because people are afraid about becoming you know in a kind of financial ruin some people they are able to deal with it you know like i have a lot of denial around it so i figure some day i'll be able to pay them off but i've just been avoiding it but um you know there's some people that are able to persevere in very you know harsh personal or social conditions and that takes a very kind of special person to have that double sight not everybody has that   : i just keep trying to... allow myself to be put into situations where... it's gotten a lot better over the last 20 years as a professional but it's still there all the time. : project or an event... um i think it was probably the decision to attempt to get into mit and to be accepted there. i think that really shifted everything for me. because i was doing one thing and i've been doing something different for the past 15 years as a result of that experience.   : sure. i had a lot of interest my entire life and somehow they were all separate and i was able to put a lot of pieces together while i was there and kind of figure some things out. and i was able... when i was able to be integrated and was also exposed to a number of new people and new ideas, it created a platform, and a network and a community that allowed me to continue to build on my ideas and be more ambitious and stuff.   : um, i would say... i'm not sure how to answer the question. i've always had a lot interest in many different areas and i go deep, i poke into them, and then i come back and i poke into others.  so i think just being very open to a lot of kinds of stimuli for me is really how i've grown i think. : i guess to start to answer that i would have to define what my field is. it's very, very ambiguous and there's no strong definition. i think the larger field is art and so i think the advice there, because there's domains and subdomains and domains and subdomains of domains. um... i think all the things that are coming to my mind are all the cliché things. just to do what you want to do. just to stick to... you know what i'm trying to say so i'll try to articulate it better... follow your interests but always in relationship to... but also be a, trying to be a kind and generous colleague as well. : many i think. : i've had a few mentors over the years and i think that's what made a tremendous difference. : sure, i think other people having a strong conviction that there's a lot of potential in myself and my ideas, it's been important as a way of establishing that within my own self. but then, one mentor in particular, [name 1: the participant’s mentor], for me really just opened up a tremendous number of opportunities, just sort of pushing me out into the world and basically promoting and championing my work to an extent where it was able to, after that, able to continue on its own. : um, he was more of a mentor who led by example. just sort of seeing how committed and dedicated and generous he was, and in that example was the most important thing. : hm. i think its necessary to do it immediately, always. yeah.  : what does that mean? : yeah, that makes sense. for me, the approach is to not be in the rat race or not play the same game everyone is playing but instead to invent and develop something which is entirely its own path. : i mean for me that question is why is it important to get involved in science?  why is philosophy important? it's the same question. and i think we're all trying to make sense of ourselves and the world and our relationships to other people and we do that in different ways depending on... i'm not sure what... but some people just think maybe in a way that is more visual than language based or based in logic... i think of philosophy and science and art as being very parallel but just different forms of expressing or trying to get at the same kind of understanding of ourselves and the world around us. : it is why i do it. to make sense of things. and also i think importantly to open new questions. not to make sense of things... that's really not the goal. to expand the kinds of questions and understanding that we can attempt to understand.  : both is a good answer. i'm trying to think if there's something else to say about that. oh, i think again like getting into aphorisms and clichés it's just really what i feel i need to do. i've done a lot of things and i didn't really start on the path that i'm now until i was 30 years old. i was trying other things and learning other things and doings other things in between, so this is what i found is what makes me work... it's what i need to do.   : well, i always... well i guess when we were talking about my work i do three things with equal balance. i'm a really committed educator. i put a lot of time and energy into other people and mentoring other people and then i've always, for the last fifteen years, run an open source software project in communities as well and co-run and cofounded that with a friend, with a colleague. and so i'm always doing these three things at the same time and they're always kinda competing for energy and attention, so there's really never been a down cycle because something else will grab complete attention for a while and things always balance. : i think i never have a chance to have an interest wean because something will just demand attention and it will flow there for a while.   : i mean there are a few weeks here and there where i'm depressed, but i'm overall (laughter)... yeah. : it is. : i'm not interesting in trying to convey anything in specific. it's more to try and help them define and realize their own goals and ways of being. : a lot of conversations and questions and sort of opening new ideas. : that's interesting. after two years, yes, often, i think. but, i... it's exciting when people surprise you and exceed all kinds of imagination. : if someone's doing it out of pure interest and they're entirely engaged rather than they're... well you know in the world you can do something where you're fully committed or you can have a job and i think sometimes people can treat school sometimes as a job rather than a passion and a complete commitment... that i think separates the different students out. : it depends when we mean by... what was the question? : not in themselves as individuals and per... well yes there's tremendous differences because... but i really... my goal is for everyone to be an individual, rather than to generalize people into such categories. but, the field of art and in particular sort of my domain of media art is... it's a lot of white dudes and so that really provides a lot of barriers and, i've even seen that changing in the last few years in really positive healthy ways. but it's a barrier. i mean i think every field has its own balance where there is, where it's often more difficult for women i think in the field of media art. it's a field that needs to do a lot better. so i think it's less the individual, but the world. : mmm hmm : bad advice (laughter). yeah... i mean one thing that's come up over the last few weeks while i've been doing this is if we were doing this twenty years ago, if we were doing this seven years ago, how likely i think some thinks would be the same but i think a number of things would be tremendously different. i think people just need to make their own choice about that. is it important for you to have a partner where you really share a life or is that not important? and if that is important to you then you're going to have to make a lot of professional decisions in a way forgo a lot of opportunities in order to make that happen, so i think it's really... i think entirely about what individuals themselves need? : i... balance better now than i ever have before. i ended up for a long... i mean that was kind of the running thread of marriage and relationships was working too much, but it's been a lot of years of transitioning. i mean at the moment specific strategies is basically just to be there in the morning, be there in the evening, work as much as i can from after the kids go to bed until i crash and then take the weekends totally off. like that's a really specific strategy, but that's where things are right now.   : yeah i think always. i mean continuously. : um, sharing ideas. and, in our world it's a lot about discussing the work in front of the work and sort of hearing other people's ideas about it or how are people responding to this?  and that's not to mean you change your ideas according to how people respond but it gives you insight into how the work is reading or what other people are seeing in the work. and sometimes you're trying to evoke something but that's not happening, and so sometimes it needs to be tuned to be more in line with your original ideas for the work. and so in this day and age of course we have all of the ranges of social media as well and so you have information kind of flowing in tangentially and peripherally about what people are doing, like different networks are doing around the world and that kind of triggers thoughts and ideas continuously.  : um, what do you mean by pursue? : sometimes you seek people out in order to try to open and exchange. someone's doing something that's really extraordinary so you want to get into communication with that person.   : sometimes yeah. or through all forms of electronic communication. i mean, i still think a lot of the best things always happen around a table or in a room with somebody. but things happen on a lot of different levels now. and i think conferences and kind of gatherings and exhibitions still become extremely important. points for checking in and making new connections. so i think that still functions very much these days. : is that like a really vague and general answer or? : okay. hm... : i mean of course, absolutely. my parents were very, i mean more clichés, but they were really supportive of what i wanted to do and they really encouraged it. i was a kid who was drawing all the time, that's just the kind of kid that i was. so they made sure that i was able to pursue that, i had what i needed, extra art lessons kind of out in the world... so i think that full support and very loving environment definitely established and had a profound effect on how i am.  : um, i mean kate has always... someone that i talk to continuously about everything, so a collaborator in that sense and my children are starting to lead to i would say a major shift in the work and the way i think about the world just through being with them and experiencing the world with them is having a significant change on who i am, how i think, and how i operate and now it's starting to change the work that i'm making. : i have a sister. : in different ways, yeah. so, we don’t have an incredibly close relationship right now so it's not a huge effect right now. : um... they're synthesized from everything that i take in. so either that's from history or philosophy or films... um or seeing, you know, exhibitions, conversations with colleagues... exhibits i attend... so and the list goes on and on and on. actually more importantly music at this point too.   : i often times kind of go through cycles of taking things in and pushing things out and so i always have a long, long list and stack of books and stack of films to watch and things just sort of... sort themselves out when there's gaps. i mean and also keeping notebooks and sketchbooks of ideas and ideas and ideas. so, sometimes things kick around for years before they really become something, because i'm working on something at the time and when there's a little bit of space, i go back to the ideas that have been stewing around for a very long time and what kind of grabs me at the moment is the next way. but i often times work in bodies and series of works where i might work on a series of projects that are related to each other strongly for two years or five years and things go in cycles that way. and oftentimes they blend and dovetail into each other, so one thing will get started and then stop and then the other thing will taper off and then the other thing will get going so there's this period of overlap in ideas as well.  : there was one time. i finished a body of work that was about, took about seven years to do and then i just didn’t know what to do after and the way that i dealt with that was to... i went with the best thing that i had at the moment. i don’t think, think, think... i think through making and so always producing and creating is the way in which i think through things mostly. i try not to do a lot of editing and censoring before i start something, i try and experience it before i evaluate it. and so just always making and creating is my basic model. and then at that point i've made a new body of work. and then one thing in particular from that body of work led to the next two to three years of work.   : yeah, yeah, yeah. they're always pushing against each other.   : well, i guess it’s a little bit different for the way that i work. i need to be rational to produce what i make because i write software as the visual art and so that's when the rationality because really important. logic becomes essential, like how do i construct this thing? it's a mixture of engineering and inventing at the same time. but everything else is intuition. so the ideas and the experiences that are constructed are all as a result of how they feel. and i'm not trying to have something feel a specific way. it's more experiencing it and then moving it and then experiencing it and moving it somewhere else.   : yeah, that happens continuously, yes. i mean a lot of the work it's hard to really put language around it. that's something i've always struggled with because it's not about that... anyway, what's the next question? : yes. : yes. : one place i get a lot of ideas is listening to music in a hall. somehow, in that environment where the music has such fidelity and its such rich information, it kind of triggers this mind wandering thing. and ideas kind of come out of that.   : but often times things get solved while i'm sleeping. but that's really more the rational part of things that get solved when i'm sleeping. like you'll go to bed with a problem and you wake up with an answer. um... yeah day dreaming in general is, i think things work themselves out that way.   : umm, that’s again one thing that's changed tremendously over the years. i think i sleep between 6 and 7 hours a night right now. that's largely a result of having children of like needing... like if julien wakes up at 5 in the morning, i need to be able to be present with him. so i had to force myself to start going to sleep, which took years (laughter). : go to bed at like two and wake up at seven or something like that, or eight and then sleeping more on the weekend. : it depends on where it is in the process too. if it's something that's brand brand new, then often times there's no editing. but if it's something i've been doing for a few years, i can start with more of a firm idea of where it's going because i have other projects that have happened before that i'm building off of.  : sure, so i talk a lot about this idea of sketching and what it means to sketch and i think it's important, one thing that i've kind of come to a conclusion, it's important to sketch with materials that are similar to the final material. so if you're sketching music, a keyboard is a good way to do it.  if you're sketching a building, having some cardboard and a knife in front of you could be a good way of doing it. i mean everything kind of starts with paper, but then you need to like, it's not that there's a sketch and this finished work, there's all these different levels of completeness kind of in between. and so this idea of sketching with code becomes important where you might have an idea that's fuzzy and you write a piece of code in order to see what that feels like. and so it's sort of planting different seeds and then from that you look at them and kind of see what's more interesting and you kind of...it's making these trees where oftentimes there'll be hundreds of like half-finished programs but only one of them will kind of be the final piece. so you go up a path and then sometimes it's not good and so you go back and go up another path... that kind of branching structure. for exploring. : um, i wait a while.   : i mean a lot of it is still driven by if i have something that needs to be done, like an exhibition or commission deadline. and so often the half-formed work kind of is there for a long time.  and that's kind of the motive... i really enjoy that area. so, sometimes i'll finish something the day after an exhibition opens or sometimes even a few weeks after the exhibition opens. like i'll decide that it needs to be a little bit different and so i'll make a tweak or a tune... but i think ideally i'm working continuously and allow things to be for like six months before i would have it in the public view. i mean i've learned that through experience. like i've kind of rushed things and then basically taken that work out of my body of work at a later time.   : well, again it's towards the end of it i have a really clear goal but at the beginning i don’t. i generally have a number of competing ideas that are... that i find to be the most fascinating ideas to me at the moment and they often times those ideas find their way into a single work where they kind of... there's different levels or ways of reading that piece.  : um, hmmm. yeah, i mean ideally you put things on a screen and you run it for a really long time and just kind of keep it in mind by having it up and passing by it at different times of the day with different frames of mind. i mean the traditional way of doing that is to have a wall that kind of references or represents ideas or where the work currently is, but for me the work is time based and time is entirely essential and if you're not seeing it moving you're not really seeing the work. it would be the equivalent of looking at a photograph of a dance performance and trying to figure out what the dance performance is about just from that, so putting things on screen and then spending a lot of time with them. a lot of time just watching and looking is the best way to evaluate it and keep your mind around it. : and we're talking about the artwork work now? not the teaching? : ok, um... there's a constant struggle to find the time and space to make work. i think one thing about the kind of work that i do is that often times it takes hours to get into it. you can't just start it and sometimes in the most intense periods of working on a project you can keep it there, and so you can start and stop. if for a month or two months at a time you can kind of keep it going, but... so some days it can be the entire day and other days it's just little pieces. : i mean also there was a time before where i could really just, i would work intensely.  but you know since having children that's really radically changed and i imagine there will be a time where i work that intensely again. so, things have, yeah... structured and restructured themselves a lot over the time that i've been working... sorry what's...    : sorry, i naturally just want to work all of the time and so learning how to not work all of the time has been.. it's been really complicated and taken a lot of time. alright, sorry... so the themes. : well, i think now so many years later, i've balanced things so it's not that weighing anymore.  : um, through having a priority of having a partner and hav– and wanting to be a committed parent. i mean those have forced the change.   : no, no..  : yeah. : i was trying to think of counters... like people i know who work in a very different way.  but, that sounds right to me. that's just a matter of having a lot of ideas and following those ideas.  some of them unexpectedly are extraordinary and many of them die a quick death.   : the university forces me to quantify my productivity in these insane reviews we have every three years. so, i think that's one metric. do i quantify my productivity... no i think i qualify it.   : is it good? (laughter). um, for me quantity is not the goal, it's never been the goal. but i found that's just the way that i get the best results and think the best is through the quantity... yes. : um, i definitely produce fewer than many people and more than others. okay, i think one thing that's important... i've remained productive for 15 years without really any lapse in that and also the ideas have continued to advance and evolve and progress. i think one thing that's really disappointing with visual artists is sort of finding the thing and then pursuing that for forty years in small, small details. i mean that's one way to have a practice and that's one way people want to have a practice, but for me, i think being able to continue growing and having new ideas and sort of pushing the experience forward is what i privilege and prioritize, so i think being able to do that over... over... i mean it's easy to do when you're in school, when you're in art school, when you have that kind if, or when you're in a residency, but being able to figure out how to balance that and how to keep moving forward with the whole balance of life is where i think a lot of people fall out. and so i feel like i've crossed that hump, so in that way i think i've remained productive.   : that gets asked a lot at different lectures. the best answer is it's done when it's done. i think it's when you have a failure of imagination, of i can’t imagine anything else that i can to do this to make it more of what i imagined it to be or what i want it to be. or when you take a work to its conclusion that is when you move it away far enough, it becomes another work, in a sense.  so, the work finds itself and finds its own conclusions based on its starting points for its conditions. : yup. : yeah, i like that. i mean i was just thinking, so many of these cognitive tests are about short term memory and i know that i have a terrible short term memory because it's something i've never worked on and never developed. i mean you can tell me more about this but something that i often think about is the way a 19th century mind operates maybe compared to a mind like my own where i rely on a lot of prosthetic knowledge. i basically... i think my mind is more of a data base of where to find things or how to find things and i just don't bother...really trying to retain a whole lot, but i mean certain stuff sticks for me and sound and music sticks as i think as it does for most people, and images stick and i think i have a very good memory for images and sound and when i hear something or see something, i compare and contrast to the whole kind of library and archive and for me that's a form of synthesis. : i mean, i think you know a lot more about that than i do myself. i think i have a... my own perception which may be false, is that i have kind of like a fuzzy and porous mind where... i seem to be able to make some connections across fields that other people find curious. : as both. : i mean sometimes i can really focus in and concentrate for hours at a time but i think my general mode is continuously... my mind going in different directions at the same time. : um, not absent minded. i think a bit spacey.   : i have my own ideas that you push out the obvious stuff first in order to get to the... further stretching sort of other areas and other ideas... so i guess more than inhibiting, it's more discerning and being able to see what is available to... what is obvious and clear and what is a more interesting further like more long term experience or goal.   : hmm, i'm gonna go back to the thing where i think you know more about the way my mind works than i do at this point but i think i can inhibit things but i'm uncertain. my natural mode is just to throw it all out and to just throw things out and go from there. : i don't think anyone would say i'm impulsive.   : yeah. : i've never... i don't think so. i mean it may be just because i've never had an issue sitting in a classroom and paying attention and doing well with that kind of work. so, but i grew up in a time when that wasn't diagnosed or talked about technically. different time and place.   : hmm, i say i work slower in the sense that i try and be very discerning about what i'm putting in my head and really trying to seek out interesting texts and interesting ideas and i spend more time reading and watching and looking at experiencing now and before i think i was just like go go go go go go go.  so i think i'm trying to improve the quality of the ideas and to really have a... i'm working on trying to have more of a framework that can be articulated and expressed as a part of the work rather than having it be a purely a visual experience. : i'm reading... i'm trying to read more and i'm trying to read more history, theory, and philosophy and i'm trying to let that affect the work while before i felt i just didn’t have time to do that and now i'm forcing myself to take the time.  so i mean yeah in relation to the question of how the work changed... it's changed.   : and also i'm far more interested in music right now than i am in visual art... so that's... i'm finding more relationship to what i do to composing because of this inherit time based and structuring time than i am in the history of painting and drawing because it doesn’t have that time-based component. so those are things that are emerging and evolving with the work. : no i think it's...well, paradigm shift... no. it's a different perspective. and it's also going back to prior ideas and folding them in, like ideas that have been dropped and folding them back into things. : well, we talked about - i think it was your second question or something like that – which was what has been the most challenging for you? i think another thing as well that's very challenging and the only reason i'm mentioning is because i think it manifests itself in the work, is trying to... subsume the idea of my ego and really trying to fight against the idea that i'm important or talented or gifted. that's something i'm not interested in, being sort of the artist, genius. whether i am or not doesn’t really matter. but i think a lot of the work is about flattening hierarchies and it's about... it's almost always about similar materials and how they relate to each other. as opposed to more of a classical understanding of visual composition, i'm interested in fields in conditions. i'm interested in how things... not how things look but how things operate and behave in relationship to each other. i'm not interested in climaxes and tension, i'm very much interested in things that are continually changing and things that are... where hierarchies are dissolved. so, for me that's something i struggle with as an individual that i think is reflected in the work. : sure, a lot of the compositions are sort of undifferentiated fields rather than strong sort of figures or what we traditionally think of as an image... it's more oftentimes abstracted to the point to where it's no longer can be acknowledged as a representational form or image. is there a way to clarify that more? : that's right.   : that's true. i haven't really been able to layer them in the way that i've really wanted to.  i'm kind of at the cellular level rather than the tissue level in that sense. but those are ideas that have been a part of the work for a really long time. but i think the work is really focused entirely on systems, on actions and choreography rather than images, and images fall out of what those systems do.   : yeah, so going back to the ego thing, rather than me imposing a top down hierarchy, it's setting a set of conditions where the form emerges from the bottom up. so that's maybe a more clear way to say it. : sure sure.   : it's been really interesting. : of sustaining myself financially without any outside assistance since i graduated college. : my folks were able to get me into a good school and so i was recruited off campus... it was a combination of i worked really hard…i had slightly a different background, different interests than a lot of people had, i had something unusual, and then from there it was just you do a good job—what was the thing—neil goodman has this really great speech where he said, "if you deliver on time, if you're nice about it, and the work's good," those are the three things. you can get by on two, but if you do all three, you’re always good. and i probably most of the time do all three and so yeah i've always – i was just talking about it with my girlfriend the other day and there are days when i’m like “how do i make a living?” like i'm sitting here, and i'm coming up with things, and somehow magically at the end of the year there’s enough money to keep it all afloat. i'm not the best business man in the sense of i'm gonna go out and make a sales pitch and grow the business, like i do my thing and day in day out and every once in a while someone comes out and says, "that's a good thing, can you make one like that for me?" and that's my money. … (10:50 on recorder) interviewer: so you’re saying that you think they’re connected, this sort of anxious or neurotic thing, the bad outcomes…: i grew up in germany and from preschool/kindergarten on…i think that may have been some of my mom’s anxiety that i was carrying with me…not a lot of family friends, not very geared towards dealing with adults…yeah, he’s not with us. and there was a lot of physical violence that came with that…which…not great…what can i say that’s gonna get me beaten up? at the same time, what do i say that gets me a pat on the back from the teachers? i think the disagreeableness came from the other students…which also, i inherited from my dad who was the same way; we had a similar path growing up. then it’s just sort of about modulating that. you don’t want it to  be like whatever you say you’re wrong…to me they’re totally related, that i’ll always have the anxious thing in my head…and then making the choice of “do i care or don’t i?” or yeah that could happen but no big deal. and all of the stuff that i got really known for is in some ways story stuff. and it’s about running with some premise and noodling it out and seeing what happens .and people are like that’s really interesting, that’s really unusual…whenever i give a talk….i don’t know, you find me what you find unusual… : methods for design and advertising…you come up with a strategy and you really ruminate with the strategy…let’s put em all up on the board…and i totally understand the benefit of that process, and when i've had the benefit of that…i get the assignment—either i immediately have a thought and go oh ok lets just do that or i sort of have to let it percolate for days, weeks…i’ll go straight into ink basically, whatever the method is… i’ll just keep working it until it’s done…and usually in the screw-ups of it is where the interesting stuff happens. and i was talking about it with [coworker 1]—about the tests that we both did here—with the two parallel lines—and he was like oh i did like 50. and i was like what i did like 9 because iw as shading things. but so many times, something comes out of the shading and going through the process…man the whole process seemed to be geared towards the idea, something pops into your head… yeah something pops into your head that’s just enough to get you over the hump to start wrking…and it turns out differently…well in my head this all lined up…you generate stuff. and you go oh ok that wasn’t what i was looking for…what if i build the whole thing off of this. and i think for a lot of people that’s…i don’t know that my process is super unusual or super—what an elevated thing that is. i think structurally, companies don’t give people that opportunity…you have to document some sort of linear process…everybody look like you’re working. and i think what’s maybe unusual, i've set up a system for myself…the german saying is “stare holes into the air”… : every time i come here i come straight from therapy—a lot of that is that fear. ive been doing this commercially for 30 years, and i've had nothing but lovely…and every time i have a project, it scares the crap out of me. this is gonna be the one where i…which the wilder’s clients actually turns away a lot of people because it’s too much, it’s too confusing… and it’s purely my need to show myself every once in a while…it’s ok to do the next thing. and so a lot of –again the stuff that’s been successful has been process-based, like the monsters…trying to address that fear…putting something down that’s out of my control or out of my immediate nitty-gritty control…so anything i can do to just start a process, even if it’s lame…at least i’ve done something. so if i do a book or something—well let me set up a document…all right now let me put that in. let me take the text that i have…let me just do this little thing….stay under the fear threshold and hopefully get enough momentum…i mean the worst thing is hunting for that idea…i’m not gonna do anything until i have this great idea…it’s a miserable way of working…it can become a great idea i think. maybe there are people who have---the heavenly light shines down upon them and rains…but i’ve not had it… but then i tried to draw that character and i ended up with a hundred that looked totally different…i would like to experience that…but i like the smaller ideas…this gives me something to do. and i think that’s why i'm hireable as a professional..i know how to dance around and make something that builds an idea, and i also have enough awareness of the process…this looks the most promising, i can probably—if you’re an old prospect...might not be a giant nugget but there’s probably enough here … :…he also emigrated from germany to austria, which doesn’t sound like a huge difference…he was of the hill folk, and so to come to the big city, he definitely has a chip on his shoulder…a lot of that i picked up on. and then it’s germany. its very—it was certainly then very regimented—you do this you get a gold star, you do not do this you don’t get a gold star…i think it’s picking—the anxiety then is what community do i pick, what do i have to do to be successful…exclude me from other communities? ….ok where do i lie myself?...they were both loners. so it was very—there weren’t any kids growing up…so then with going into schools, all the interesting stuff is the knowledge, and the knowledge is with the teachers. and i didn’t recognize at the time that…how to be a kid and how to interact with peers, but for me it was like “tell me about adam’s”, so all my allegiance went to that. and that of course excluded me from the other kids….social outcast stuff that came from that and physical violence…i've picked my trie and now i gotta really deliver…gotta go back into the general prison population… :the general trend towards art came from my dad… i also saw that was something that was valued with him…i started drawing when i was 3-4 years old probably….probably sooner than that…i saw them getting exalted for it, so i'm like shit that’s a good deal. if you get the new yorker… has this wonderful, lovely loose line…shit that’s great. and i remember one of the very formative things, there was a teacher….where he could draw bank notes…holy cow, that’s amazing…that’s unbelievable, that’s magic. i actually invited him to our house….can you just hang with me and show me some drawing? … that’s fairly unusual….id be very curious to see the drawings he made now…it felt so superhuman…which is why the monsters are so….it’s creating something that’s correct in and of itself. there was a cartoonist i wrote to when i was a teacher when i was in germany….and never gave me drawing advice…but he was funny…and he was just massively successful and continues to be to this day. no artistic…  : so he was a super successful guy, right. just showing—like being in touch with someone, like an actual, meetable human  being… he gave me some of his overflow work without telling anybody that i was a teenager without knowing my age and gave me all this work…there’s no reason why you shouldn’t do it. and then looking back…many of them are similar to what he’s done…i’m just doing the thing that was modeled for me when i was a kid…people had little bits to teach me, like little bits of technique…they just had the key to one door.  : well i went to arts center in pasadena…i knew i wanted to go to arts school, and i looked around germany…and i got into one, but i got into it too easy…and i was like mmm… if you’re taking me without a little bit of pushback…no….i’d come here on vacation a few times…once when i was 17 and once when i was 18…i wanted very much to speak english…i’m a much freer, happier in person in english than i am in german...let’s not do that. lets just study art in america…and i was actually gonna come to ucla and got in a loose interview…and then i showed up, basically portfolio in hand…oh we’re shutting down the graphic design department for two years…she worked on cal arts, arts center, and otis. i went into art center…super very elegant design that sort of spoke to my openness…car design and film and everything…and it was like a shift of night and day, of just feeling completely ostracized and being made to feel very weird and unacceptable for the creative impulses…plus just learning technique, and at that point i’d already worked in germany…i also wanted a place that would teach me the tools to get the stuff…i don’t know how i’m doing because i don’t know how to get it done…oh right, you’re the same, or similar enough that we can hang out and have a good time.  : i don’t have a formal teaching position…i feel too much responsibility about doing it correctly, but i mentor some students…and it—i see it as a mitzvah—if i can help you not make some of the same mistakes, that would be great, or get you to things more quickly…well it’s open source, presumably with people i trust…maybe i can benefit from that….and it just feels nice because i’ve had so many people that were helpful to me… : that’s a good question…you’re certainly gonna go places and do things, but it tends to be in certain niches…you’ve got some real jobs, but you’re being so unbelievably neurotic about it and have so little drive…i worry about, at what point does the engine turn over? there’s a lot of other people turning, but at what moment…alright it’s turning by itself?...like wow yeah this is just gonna go crazy far. and i think i’ve known those people, but they didn’t need me to mentor them…and i’m sure that they have other people that mentor them more…and i have people who i thin are gonna go very well and just gonna do interesting stuff but aren’t necessarily gonna set that world on fire, nor do you have to. i recently was introduced to someone at art center…and then i talked to them—i talked to the teachers after and i said well—you know we really felt like we looked at this person, and we were really worried because we couldn’t figure out…so you could maybe help her you know, maybe not lead a life of poverty…i’m sure there’s a complement in their somewhere…you’re equally all over the place, and it’s all very interesting, and you’re interesting to meet…creative recruiter in her day job said people are—you need to show people are deployable…that just tells them how to deploy you. like they wanna work with you, they just don’t know how. and that’s been so much of my career…we saw this thing you did ten years ago…and now we think we  finally have something…it’s in large measure opaque to me, and all i know now is that i…and it’s very hard to make course corrections…i’d really like a bigger car or something like that…i’ve tried it, i suck at it, really, really hard…it takes knowing—it takes a certain confidence, like the picasso thing…or like the diego rivera thing…lead with the balls…i’m german enough and i'm neurotic enough that my expertise in many areas lets me see all the many, many difficult things that can go wrong…you will be a hero to your family, a savior to your colleagues, all will be well—sign here…whereas for me it’s like…i’m not sure what it’s gonna look like…might be times where it gets kinda stressful is not a great sales pitch…does not the corporate jet make. sorry, little tangent. : and i’m very curious about those results by the way, i would love to see those…how much i forgot and then what little things bubble up from ages ago. i don’t externalize as i maybe should because it would be helpful to just write things out…a lot of it happens through endless talking…i’ll sort of just chatter it out to myself until i hit on some phrase that’s evocative…sometimes it’s sketching and doodling…i remember that spaceship from that show that i liked when i was ten. its very dangerous now with google to have access from that thing…it’s actually kind of lame now… that doesn’t work with what i’m working with at all…the actuality sort of overrides it…again it’s just—like just getting to the point of making something…im learning an ew program now called z-brush…that’s well established for movie people…it’s like sculpting clay without the messiness…i love it so much…i can screw around with it until something interesting happens…shoot the arrow at the barn and paint the target around it. i'm great at that, and i can do it with some panache…i can find all these default behaviors…here’s how we get around that to get to what clay does…like that mistake is really pretty, let me put more of it in…look at this poor, poor technique…i’m going away from the working memory. so much of it is just verbal and so much of it comes from comedy…like what’s too far where the joke falls apart… : at this point it’s automatic. at this point it’s such a muscle memory… : i’m also—i've built my little box that i can play in safely. im very inhbited in many ways; i’m really shy…if i go to a conference and i’m not speaking, i’m miserable ‘cause i don’t wanna talk to anybody…as far as the creation of the actual work…don’t use your first thought…your first thought is worthless; your first thought is gonna be obvious…my thought process is automatically strange enough…let’s do that. and then i build onto it and i shave that…if i do the traditional creatie route, first thought goes out the window…this is a new thought, and then i do it and nobody connects with it because i’ve gone so far out…it’s so personal to me that i connect to it, and to me it’s like i've really grown here…but it doesn’t mean anything to me. like i have no connection to it…where you and i look at the thought…and so…this inhibition is like i just gotta do my thing, and my thing has value…sometimes it’s like alright, alright, i’m doing my best—this is all i can do…this is really interesting, this is okay…switched to different industries all the time, and i switch tools all the time…it’s that initial ascent of knowledge in a tool…look back… yeah that was a mistake…there’s a lot more different solutions in it, and then i keep going and going and eventually… but it’s hard. and it’s very easy to go into—ugh god i don’t know what the hell i’m doing…struggling through the periods of “oh, fuck, i suck.”… just carb me. : i wanted to say about the disagreeableness…it’s half like oh man everything’s beautiful, everything's great…and i’m really struggling with, especially on the graphic design side…and then there’s the very professional stuff where it has to be so….i’ve been hired to do strict graphic design work…if they have a logo that i like to say, well why would i want to redo that? it’s already good. ‘cause so much of my work…you’re doing it all wrong…finding ads that i hated in the apper because they just offended me in their shittyness…i would go into the store and i would tell them…your ad is horrible, i fixed it for you…this part of the world now looks good. and it’s very hard for me to get hired by people that have picked beautiful things before to then just…the fact that it’s new adds value. it’s just about evolving it and doing something else to keep peoples’ interest… : : : : : : : : : : oh, um... that's kind of a difficult one to start with...um i think i'm pretty proud of my work i've published so far as an artist. i feel like for my age i've done quite a lot. i feel pretty happy with a lot of the work i've made so far and the way i've approached making art. i think i've mostly managed to make the work i really wanted to make rather than what i felt was the work that would be more widely accepted by other people.   : yeah. yeah, so that’s something i'm proud of. : well, i just never felt comfortable making work that i felt like was a derivative of other people's work and often... for example if you're at the stage where you have an idea but it takes a lot of resources to realize and you kind of have to write grant applications and get money together often it's actually, i have a lot of ideas that when first described to other people, they sound pretty either undoable or people don’t really understand why that’s interesting but i think i've always had this strong sense that it's really important to do something i'm interested in. also, i get bored very easily with things i don’t want to be doing. like i've always found it hard to do something i'm not interested in. but, whereas it's very easy to overcome obstacles when it's something i really want to do, so i just feel like quite naturally i end up making the kind of work. like i have an idea and it's very easy for me to do difficult things that i would never do in other aspects of my life, so one of the projects i have in mind is this interactive installation i made where people come into the gallery and then there's a camera that captures their portraits and sort of views an algorithm to turn these photographic portraits into line drawings which are then embedded into this interactive comic book that's, so it's cogenerated, its always unique and it takes this database and drawings i've made and these portraits and sort of combines them together into this narrative, i sort of think of it as a comic book for everyone in the world. so when i first started making this project i had no idea how to do it, i didn’t really, i can't program that well but i feel like just i was so excited about that idea i found ways of doing it. so yea, i think i'm pretty proud of my approach to art.   : oh, um these are really deep questions. i think maybe the hardest one was i like to work all the time and then um, so i have some kind of workaholic tendencies and that leads me to kind of neglect my connections with other people so that's something i'm still working on. : oh um... well by i guess... put more activity, reaching out to people... yes. : oh, um... well i feel like it’s a series of different steps. like coming to study at [university 1] was a major step because i grew up in [country 1] and then... but just being in [city 1] and sort of seeing these artists who sort of in [country 1] i thought more of as historical figures i studied in books rather than... but here they're just walking around the campus.  so i think that gave me more of a sense of what's possible to achieve as an artist and i guess one of the major things that happened to me last year was i did a fairly large scale and large budget public art commission. it was commissioned by [company 1] and [university 1] arts and that kind of helped me be able to work with budgets i haven't been exposed to before, so practically that really helped but that's also related coming here to [city 1].  : i just came here as an exchange student when i was an undergrad and then i came back here for grad school. at first i just randomly picked out [university 1] from a long list of universities that was available, so ya. : yeah. i think its definitely more because art making is a very social thing like i think conversations with other people who work in the art world is really important. i guess in all fields that’s one of the really important things, so. i think as long as i get out of my studio enough that usually happens.  : yeah. definitely a lot of my former professors whom i still talk to. i think one of them is doing the study as well. [influencer 1 (previous participant)]? ya, so its just really important to talk about the practice of building an art career because it takes a really long time and then you kinds have to be patient and just work hard and yeah a lot of people involved in the arts in [city 1] right now i feel like sometimes i do have really amazing conversations with them. there's just a lot of stuff you cant really get from a catalogue of an artist's work. you kinda have to get it in person. : i feel like there's really different kinds of teachers. there's the ones that are more hands-off in the classroom who are, but who sort of set an example, so where you're like, ok in five or ten years time i could also be at this level. and then there's other people who are more, who have interests in helping you manage your time and like the way you produce work who are really like, people think of us as being more devoted, like we do more hand-holding. that's also good to have all of these different approaches. i don’t think i had a professor who i didn’t learn a lot from. : a lot of it is really practical things like. for example, say i'm doing a competition for a public art project and then i have this idea and i think it could be done for this budget, but could it be done for this budget? and things kind of like boring stuff like whether i should get liability insurance, if i should pay an attorney to read all of my contracts and that kind of stuff. but sometimes we also talk about artists we admire like architects, furniture designers, and that kind of stuff.   : no, i'm more interested in fantasizing about buying pieces of furniture... : yeah, i'm only teaching one class at [university 1] and it's definitely, i feel like i get a lot out of it because the students are really, they're all really, really talented. some of them are really talented and hardworking which is amazing. some of them i feel like will become hardworking as they come into their own but um...yeah it is important. i definitely feel like it helps me reflect on what it was like for my teachers as well just like, because before i always wondered why some of them seemed so willing to help me and now i feel like it's really gratifying when you're able to help someone and they let you know in different ways that advice you’ve given them has really helped them be able to produce work of a quality that they wouldn’t be able to by themselves and it's just really simple advice like how to structure their time and how to set milestones. : i feel like because most people have really interesting ideas and like the ability to have really original ideas is not something that you can really teach so if people have that often where they fall back is they'll go oh i have ten weeks to produce this piece of artwork, i'll just leave it till week 9 or like it's super ambitious i'm just going to work as hard as i can until it's due, so i find just teaching them how to produce a work really helps. also, part of what i like to talk to them is a lot of students will say things like, oh i have all these technical skills but i just don’t have creative ideas whereas it's kind of related to this study, i feel like it's just practice like anyone with the right methods can have really interesting ideas so that’s something i like to talk to them about. just like creating the right conditions for you to be able to have interesting ideas. : oh yeah, because its really hard for most people to be sitting in a room like this and just come up with things. i think as... so i teach both artists and designers and it's really important for them to look at a lot of art and design and there's also kind of various exercises that i've, some of them like i adopted from other artists where you literally...just you take other elements from things and then you combine them together and then most people including school children can come up with something that hasn’t been thought of before. so, one of the workshop i've done ones with these japanese artists called [artist 1] is that they, it's like they give you this form and then in the first column you write down everything you've touched since you woke up in the morning so like pillow, toothbrush, you write like twenty things and then in the next column you write down like a ridiculous adjective that describes those things, so like you can say for pillow you can say blue pillow or marble pillow just something that is ridiculous and then somehow you combine some of these different boxes together and it’s a workshop they actually do for really young school children and they come up with all kinds of really interesting things, so i sort of made a new exercise that's based on what they do which is like i just have this piece of software which takes two drawings of sort of everyday objects like a candle or a chandelier or a spoon and then it kind of gives you two random images at any time and then your job is to combine them together either in their use or quality. and then you come up with a new object, so it's just a quick exercise to get people to think in a different way that's not just i'm sitting here with a black piece of paper. : they did a workshop here. i can send you the form if you want... : um, oh well i feel like the most useful advice i've been given is you kind of have to just make the work you're excited about making and not get distracted by friends and it just is something that takes a long time for you to build up interest and visibility so you kind of have to be in it for the right reasons which is if you really want to spend your life making art. yeah. : i've always been that but i think that like i feel a lot calmer now just from knowing more artists and knowing that careers have up and downs, like some of the most celebrated artists today have had like maybe decades where no one was interested in their work and it just kept them keep working, so there's a lot of pressure on really young artists when they're graduating because there's this expectation that you go from graduation to stardom in like six months and people don’t have enough time to work out what they really want to be doing or they're excited about. i feel like it's just how to deal with that kind of pressure and use time productively.   : oh, having many is definitely much better. : you mean social contacts in the field that you're in? : nah, i always think it's good to have friends who are not artists as well so you get some perspective that not everyone thinks contemporary art as the most important thing in the world, but definitely having a lot of, knowing a lot of other artists is important. : yeah, i think those are really important too. : identity do you mean like your artistic identity? : i don’t think it's something you can plan. lots of really good artists don’t even start making art until they're 40 or 50 and some people start really early so there's not like the right timeline for people to follow. : again, it depends on the kind of artist you are. i feel like, so for example, there's this painter called [artist 2]. all he does are white on canvases, but every time he does it he sort of approach it in this new way whereas there's other artists who work in video, technology, installations, painting, drawing, and it's hard for them to stick to one thing, so i feel like with specialization people don’t really say things like, "oh i just work in marble" anymore because its different techniques more accessible these days and you can hire workers, fabricators, so it's really just more like a life-long process of searching rather than like by the age of 35 i have to have discovered my medium.   : i think it's really hard to keep it separate. there are artists where you look at their work and there's nothing overly political about it at all, but you and then someone will be like, "oh that artist has very conservative values and is republican" and be like oh that's really obvious and you can tell that from their work somehow. it could be just bias but i feel like usually you can get like a pretty strong sense of what someone's values are like. : well with the kind of work i'm interested in making, because i've made a lot of very interactive artworks where a lot of it is in public space and i always feel like there's a lot of hunger in the public for to encounter work in public space to sort of use it as this new channel of communication that helps people relate to strangers in a different way in a public space, or it's hard to rationally argue that like artists really, i almost don’t want to make a rational argument for why it's important. i'm sure... ya. : oh, well, yeah i, so when i was deciding what to study in college, i was very tempted to go to med school, but then i had a conversation with my mom and she said i should really do something i really want to do and i'm really grateful to her. because i would have probably dropped out of medical school to become an artist anyways because like practically it’s a really fun occupation.  it's like you could envision or imagine anything like construct a whole world and then bring it to life, so... yeah i don’t think there's many other jobs out there that would let me do something like that. : i, like in the ability to imagine doing anything else, although i often have like career envy where i look at high school friends who have become surgeons now and i think oh, seems fun to be a brain surgeon, must be so intellectually stimulating. but, yeah, at this point i just feel really focused on being an artist and i feel like i still have so far to go.   : no. : yeah, definitely there are students who are like... because you have to be really, really driven.  you can't be like, "oh i could be an artist or i could go work in advertising." usually, when i have those kind of conversations with students i kind of let them know that being an artist is not really easy. for a lot of people they have to have their day job and then use the two hours they still have later to make work, so if someone is just interested in being creative and having creative challenges, of course they can go be an art director and if they're happy with that. but some people just feel compelled to be artists and make work that doesn’t have any commercial reasons, well commercial as in i mean l like i want them to be able to make a living from their art, so i think with students there's definitely always people who have that star quality where they make good work and they're really dedicated, works really hard.  : i think, so in, definitely when i make work that has more of a technology component, so if i go to an art and technology festival conference, usually it’s the gender balance is terrible. it's like 95% men and 5% women, but i think that's also because it's also related to technology and a lot of the people go to these conferences come from the world of programming, hardware, whereas in the art world, i think if there is inherent sexism it’s a lot more subtle. if you look at statistics, it's very obvious, so like male artist's work is much more expensive and they have a lot more solo shows, but i don’t personally feel like i've been treated differently. but usually women are like in lots of other fields are affected by starting a family like if you look at the way people's careers taper off after they've had children, men definitely aren't as affected as women, unfortunately. : well, i think its, yeah, i really don’t see a huge difference. i think mainly because they work like really pioneering, and the artists who are really successful, like for example [artist 3] or [artist 4] as well, so they're really good role models, so people feel like they could just work at that level despite, yeah.   : well, i guess when i was in my early 20's i would be like, "what personal life?" but now i feel like... it's also up to the individual artist. some people are able to work 16 hours a day just on their work 7 days a week and not need any social interaction whereas for me, like if i do that i would quickly become very unhappy and not be able to work, so i, someone was telling me the best balance is like, actually i forget the numbers, but i feel like it's... i work better if i work more like a back employee like i work monday – friday from 9 – 5, i should take the weekend off... i often don’t, but i kind of pay for it with the next week, so i think it's good to have balance because a lot of what goes into the work comes from stuff that happens in life and if there's like nothing there, it's hard to feed the work. : i like to go see art, but i guess that’s also... i like to go... there's lots of things i like to do that i don’t really do. like i like to cook, i like to go hiking.  : yeah, often.    : yeah. : i think they give me the energy to work on my work later, yeah.   : probably, yeah. like i don’t remember specific sample, but i often would try to like solve something for a long time and it wouldn’t work but then i would go for a walk immediately a solution will present itself. : um, no i have a huge backlog full of ideas i want to do and i just don’t have enough time or resources to do them right now. : well usually there's the commissions which have strict deadlines associated with them so i often work on those ones and then sometimes an idea would sit in my notebook for a few months and if it still feels really exciting to me, then i'll do it. and also it's like balancing your resources.  something takes 10,000 dollars to make and i only have 1,000, i'll try to make something else. : oh, so i'm actually pretty good at sitting down and going, "ok, i have to present a design, an idea next week, so i'm going to sit here and come up with something," but usually, but that comes from many years of practice and i find it really helpful to look at a lot of other people's work.  somehow, that's just really stimulating for my own ideas.   : i find rationality really get in the way. it's just not how my good ideas happen.  like it's really important once the exciting idea occurs, then i need to like rationally figure out how to make it or how to make it work for context. say if it's going to be a project in public space, how to make it safe, how to make it robust, that's where rationality belongs i think. : yeah, definitely. : yeah just to, because then i have a very emotional sense of what this idea is and i try to keep the core of that excitement intact. but usually, it's complicated enough to fabricate that i need to plan out the steps. : yeah, so for, if it’s a commission, then i would you know like visit the site and then learn as much as possible about the site and then go through the idea generation process and then prepare a proposal for the commissioners and then i usually go talk to my fabricator and then he'll be like, "oh, this is not possible for 200,000 dollars, why don’t we use this material? or maybe use this technology?" and then it's more, usually they take place over 6 months to 3 years, and then it's sort of me finalizing the design and then handing it off to the fabricator. but if it was a smaller project where i'm making everything myself, usually if it's being made for an exhibition, then i try to do what i tell my students to do, which is set up strict deadlines like, by june i'm going to finish soldering all of these electronic components, and that kind of stuff.   : so, they're called [fabricator 1]. they're really amazing, they’ve been making really high end sculptures for like artists who are, who some of them are considered the most important artists working today or of the 20th century, they've been making work longer than i've been alive basically, so i always find talking to them really helpful because like the initial idea is always so malleable and i find just the actually physical conditions of making the work always to be really helpful in narrowing down the idea in thinking about what kind of materials, what kind of like way to what engineering requirements there are if somethings just really not possible to do. so it’s a lot of back and forth. like i would never do something that doesn’t feel right, doesn’t feel like the original core of the idea that i had, so that part i'm very protective of. like if they make any suggestions, which they never do that, i feel like is more to do with the concept of the work, i always reject it. but usually we just talked about how to bring the work to formation. and often they have suggestions i think that really kind of help elevate the idea in terms of right material or fabrication method. so they bring all of their experience of making sculptures to like, yeah to my work. : oh, it's my, the project i did for [company 1] and [university 1] arts, so they... one of my professors works with them. they've made maybe 20 of his pieces. he introduced us, because usually they don't work with people my age who are still fairly unestablished compared to their other clients, so... yeah and then we had a really good experience working together so i definitely probably will work with them for all my future creations, yeah. : oh yeah. so i have a notebook that's just, it's just all my little ideas that each notebook probably has, like one or two hundreds. you know most of them are pretty derivative and unoriginal but okay for me. there'll be like say like 5 good ideas coming out of a notebook and then sometimes i then consider the idea and then i try to figure out whether it should be a painting or a sculpture and what material would make the most sense for this idea. and then a lot of things just sort of get stuck at the same stage until i'm able to actually make it into reality.   : probably all the time in terms of... because sometimes it takes me a while to figure out how... like if something should be made out of wood or if it should be 3d printed so, yeah often they just sort of sit there simmering until one day i go, "okay, suddenly i know exactly how to make this piece!"   : what do you mean by an objective goal? : oh, yeah i'm not a very process oriented artist because i often, i just i have like the idea comes very suddenly and then i just use the rational process more as a way of protecting it and then letting it take the form that i feel best with it in the real world. so, as for like rational objectives, i would never say that this work might go as for people to have this experience when looking at it. and often i feel like i have to tell my students because they start to think about it in a really rational way where they say these are my three goals but i'm going to work from these three goals to the piece and then it's really, really hard for them to do that whereas often you would just have this really irrational, nonsense idea it doesn’t make any sense but then five years later you'll be like, "oh, this is actually about my relationship with my father." but i feel like that’s an easier way for people to work whereas going to the other way going, "oh i want to make a piece that’s about my relationship with my father, what should i do?" that’s usually a lot less productive. : yeah... first of all its really hard to control which reactions people are going to have. i feel like in a way language is really limiting, like what's powerful about art is that sometimes there's just all these things going on and a viewer maybe unconsciously or consciously they don’t... consciously understand what's going on but they are affected or they bring their own experience to the piece so you can't really control what you want people's experience to be anyway and the most powerful artworks are never made from a point of view where, usually that’s really helpful for things like grant writing where you say, "these are my objectives," but that's more just as an instrument to help people give you money. but i really feel like... at least for me the best work i've made are just the works where i'm like i don’t care what everyone else thinks. but then like when you work in public space there are imitations where it's, like you have to consider the well-being of pedestrians and just like you can't just do whatever. hopefully there's a good balance between enhancing a public space, like not messing it up, but also fulfilling like one's own strange interests.  : oh, so when it’s the concept part of the piece, i really need to have full control over what i'm making, so i've only made one collaborative project and i found that really difficult. usually, i think the division of labor has to be really clear, like i work with programmers, but – and often i'll definitely listen to people's suggestions, but i kind of need to make all of the final decisions myself, so i don’t really, yeah i can't really ever imagine working in a collective where people, where people's identities kind of merge together.  : uh, yeah i try to have several pieces going at the same time so that i don’t get bored working on one thing. and teaching definitely is really helpful for that reason as well because i would find it really hard to work in my studio for five days straight whereas breaking it up and doing something else really helps me. : yeah. : um, no its usually just a matter of time constraint. if i want to be full of ideas i can usually get to that stage pretty easily. for example, right now i'm buying a house so i just have a lot of stuff going on in my head so then the work kind of recedes to the background hopefully just for the next few weeks. : yeah. : yeah. : i would say usually 6 hours would be on work, the rest would be on non-work activities. : 8, sometimes more. : well it's just because it’s the end of the quarter i've had a few 9 hour sleeps. : oh, yeah i don’t really pull all-nighters anymore and i'm philosophically against pulling all-nighters. i try to get things done early enough so that that doesn’t have to happen. i have done that a lot during grad school but i feel like now that it's part of what i teach to students is how to avoid pulling all-nighters. : definitely earlier in the morning. i do my worst work late at night. : i think it takes a long time for artists to become good at what they do and if you think of all of the most celebrated artists ever they are always super prolific, with like a few exceptions like maybe vermeer or leonardo da vinci aren't super prolific but the works that they have are so good and there's probably a lot of works that have been lost or hasn't been discovered yet, so most people it's a really important factor. : hmm, um i sometimes use a time tracking software... : yeah, where i use toggl. so i was going through this period where i'm like trying to work in a regular in a way as possible like i walk into the studio at 9 and then i leave at 6 and i... that structure makes the process a lot easier for me so i use toggl to track how much time i spend making work versus writing grants. : yeah i think at one point i felt like i'm spending too much time trying to gather resources for making work rather than making the actual work, which is not good. yeah. so i feel like now i've made more adjustments. : yeah. : yeah... it's hard it never feels like enough. it's, well i guess artists also think about... i started to really think about kind of how far my career has advanced. i don't really have a number for like how many drawings i'm making a year. although, i feel like if i had an actual number then it would help me realize i need to be more productive, so that's a good idea to think about. : oh um, i think... i also paint and i know i paint a lot less or i produce much fewer paintings than other painters i know because i make these very meticulous paintings where i have to kind of set everything up and photograph things really carefully and... but maybe that’s just an excuse. i definitely feel like i should be more prolific. : um, it's really different because for the big commission works that's made by fabricators, a lot of hours of labor go into them, but at some point i don’t really have... i'm not really involved anymore, i just go and i just pick the paint color or say like, "this needs more sanding."  so like it's really hard to know. i don’t really talk about how much time other people are... i mean usually when i meet up with people everyone just complains about how they don't have enough time to make their work, so yeah... : oh, umm... well so with the more interactive technology-based works, you're never really done because the technology never works as well as i want it to work and the installation process is never as easy as i want it to be and also all the software is constantly getting updated. also, when you're working with people, i think those kind of projects have a much higher level of complexity. or if i'm fabricating something myself, usually there's like various problems once it's installed so maybe like motors don’t work as well as i want them to, but since i've been working with this amazing fabricator... like for my last piece i just made a 3d file and then i emailed it to them. so, that's kind of like with the 3d file, i got it to a point where i felt like it couldn’t be approved anymore. so it's kind of different for... : oh, um i just... oh, well, because there are fairly realistic paintings, like painted in this very academic style where like the subject matters are quite weird but the techniques are more like old mastery, so that makes it easier to be like, "ok, this looks as complete as this painting by carel fabritius, so ill just, yeah. whereas i think it gets to a point where i feel like i might mess it up if i keep going... : yeah. : um, quite a lot. but, there is a lot of works, so i used to make a lot of room-sized installations with all of these components and then it's, well i also really like to make new work and i feel like i have so many new ideas that i might never have enough time to realize so it's kind of a... i think my usual urge is to make new work than to fix old work that needs fixing. : yeah. : oh, i think... so with the exercise i was telling you about, i actually turned it into an artwork where... so using an aid of some kind where you literally are looking at these two objects and i picked objects that i found to have some kind of poetic resonance. i actually used this piece of software where it shows you two drawings of everyday objects and i worked with friends who are artists and designers and they all made really interesting things, like someone made a... they had a picture of a candle and a chandelier and combined it together and made a chandelier that’s made out of wax entirely, so when you light it it completely disappears, so it kind of takes these two ideas and in a very literal way combines them together. i had another friend who made this piece... so he had a teacup and a teaspoon so he made this ceramic teacup that has a teaspoon on it but it's like a catapult, so you can hit it really hard and it will catapult the teabag into the corner of the room. so these works are very atypical of the kind of work they usually make, so i feel like it's using this software that just... so it introduces this element of chance and yeah it works really well for people who are not artists and designers as well. once i showed it as more, like i provide the stack of paper for people to draw their ideas and they were really interesting things that were really obviously made by schoolchildren and... what was the question again? : oh, okay. so i think i definitely notice, i can go into these like hour long, really intense periods of brainstorming where i'm able to come up with lots of ideas. it usually works much better if i sort of stimulate my brain with works by other artists. i've like tried to brainstorm on the beach and that really doesn’t work so i think just, yeah. like the stimulation of looking at other art really helps. : hmmm... um, it's... i don’t know, yeah. i've just never... i don’t really know what other people's brains are like so i've just always been pretty good at this. but i also think it's just practice like i do it a lot. : um, i'm very focused. : certain kind of information i retain really well like... sometimes if it’s the plot of a novel that i was very emotionally engaged with, i can remember that... : i can. whereas like names of important figures in current events is like very easy for me to forget. : yeah, i think so. : no. i hardly ever forget things i'm supposed to do umm...yeah. that’s not, there are occasions when like my husband ask me a question and he says what he says and i'm obviously thinking about something else and is not very quick to respond but i feel like that’s a rare occasion when i've been accused of absent mindedness. yeah : um yeah i feel like social inhibition and like inhibition in terms of thinking is pretty different. i know there's this, like if you think of van gogh as a example, everyone has this idea that he's like really out there, he's really crazy, but if you read his diary it's so like he's such a deep thinker and so like rational and thinks about art and the world so deeply so i feel like for artists that’s really a stereotype that’s not very helpful. i think, yeah you might be really interested in the work of the surrealists because a lot of their work is about coming up with methods that help inhibit conventional thinking. they invented all these games for example where um... oh so they have automatic writing as an example where you write whatever comes to your head, that’s kind of in a way like being, inhibiting just your usual ways of thinking. they have lots of other really good stuff where you, yeah, where it's like how to circumnavigate conventional thinking.  : um, i think like socially i am very inhibited, i always think a lot before i say anything, um but i always have found... like conventional. i have a very negative reaction to conventional thinking... that’s a really interesting thing to think about. so i hardly ever say things that people expect me to say, i mean unless like, i feel like i always act in a socially appropriate way but um my best conversations with people are always more about exploring the unexpected.  : oh um probably just a habit because both of my parents are intellectuals and i've never, maybe they trained me to like dislike conventional thinking. it's just probably natural, i don’t know.  : oh um, so my dad was a physics professor and my mom is a, she used to be a writer and then i moved with her to [country 1] when i was 10 and my dad stayed in [country 2]. so she's very um, she's a very creative person and she never makes me do stuff i don't want to do. like if she um feels like i have to attend a social event with her, we, she always lets me bring a book (laughter), i feel like that kind of maybe not very strict parenting helped a lot. : i read a lot. i probably, a lot of what other children, like it's very different after i moved to new zealand, i suddenly had a lot more free time cause i was already kind of doing calculus in [country 2] when i was 10, but in [country 1] like that math was so easy, um. yeah so i read quite a lot and... enjoyed nature i would say... um and i made, like i painted, i made up stories... : no. : no. : oh um, hmm... i feel like... so the kind of um like what i believe now about producing work, a lot of it came from him because he worked in the game design industry for a long time and now he's a professor of game design so he basis his entire pedagogical approach helping students be good producers in order so they can realize their ideas to their uttermost potential, which is even more important i think for game design than art but it's really helpful. so it took a long time for him to um witness all of my terrible procrastination, the other night before the opening to be finally like 'no we can talk about this if you want' and then i resisted for a for a really long time but now i'm a huge believer in having a good production process. so that’s one major way he influenced me. : uhh yeah.  : i feel like now it’s a lot easier because i've learned to trust my instinct more um because people will always be like 'this is good work', 'this is bad work', 'this is not important why are you doing this', so learning to be able to ignore that is really important. whereas when i first started i was very influenced by everyone i respected and my perception of what was good work but, so i definitely feel much confident in the way i work. also now it's easier for me to say, 'i'm going to stop now it's 6pm on a friday', whereas before it just felt like i could never work enough to get where i wanted to be. : yeah probably, i think, yeah.  : yeah i feel like recently because the program i went to is very focused on technology so we learn about electronics and programming as tools for art making and for a long time that was something i was really focused on, it always felt like the work had to have some kind of dazzling technological component um but then i gradually realized why i was really interested in the thing that the technology enables which is creating something that um people can have maybe a more engaged experience with, other than just looking at the work. also just with looking at a lot more work, cause there is work i like that's just paintings or.. so yeah i feel like recently that's more of a paradigm shift, so i started painting, i felt like, also cause technology is just a tool so if you have a process where the tool is leading the process it kind of messes up the work as well, so, yeah.  : hmm... i feel like that a fairly good coverage of everything, yeah.  : hmm.... i... well i think for art it's um also like creativity is kind of a, it's one part of being a good artist um because definitely, well i would sort of think of creativity more as originality um because a lot of work is very derivative whereas it's not often you see something where you feel like it's really new. and often like, but then also because there's such a long history and culture, i think, i'm beginning to realize it's important to also have that in mind while you’re making innovative work because it's very social, it's like this community of people who have this shared background, because there is, i definitely... like i have this view of art as more, it's not a special thing because creativity is everywhere in all disciplines, so it's just like, and i also sort of think of it not as this like mythical quality that artists have i feel like again it's something that could be achieved with practice for almost everyone um, yeah.  : umm no. : umm, wow.... all things i have done in life. um... i suppose probably my family! i mean, you know, like done -laugh- -inaudible- that i am proud of. : probably my wife. having a great partner. : oh man. umm... i think a lot of it just self-doubt.  : umm... somehow knowing that what i do as a professional and stuff isn't the most important thing in life. : so i think when i ended up working at [university 1] for a summer, doing an internship there. that really changed the trajectory of my life, so i saw that scientists and artists could work together. and so, yeah, so that would be the thing that was probably the biggest influence on my professional life. : yeah well i think it was pretty immediate and i loved the big ideas that scientists were working with, and i realized that maybe - well to me it felt more fulfilling to work on those kinds of questions than maybe marketing and things that i probably would have gone - marketing and branding, things that i probably would have gone into otherwise. : hahaha, well i don't have much of a field -laughter-. but um, i always talk about trying to find things that you're good at and things that you're passionate about and um wherever - if you can find things that are high up in those - i usually have like this quad-chart, one side is passions and the other is skill and wherever you can kind of get to the upper right hand corner, the highest passion, the highest skill, is probably a good place to start as far as trying to pursue something that you want to do for the rest of your life.  : haha. what was the second half? : oh. uhh, well i'm not specialized, so. -laughter-. i mean i think that just really depends on the person. i think there are some people that are just sort of equipped to be specialists in things and we need specialists and then there are other people that are equipped at being more generalist and seeing big pictures, and we need those as well. and maybe it's just that we need to find - everyone needs to find what they are more equipped in and what they more enjoy doing, rather than saying to do one or the other. i think we need less specialists in generalist roles. less generalists in specialist roles. -laughter- : in my particular area is probably because umm... i think scientists have big complicated stories to tell and they need more people to, who can help them tell their stories.  : well i mean i guess it depends on, i mean like i said i am a super generalist kind of person. so it doesn't really matter to me if i am communicating um...you know a science thing or something else but what i love to do is give people moments of awe, and i think that’s really important because i think we spend most of our days on things that are the opposite of awe -laughter-, and i think we kind of are brought back to our humanity when we see that there are things that are bigger than ourselves and that we're part of something that is bigger than ourselves.  : yeah so um i had the opportunity in college to be an artist working at a scientific institution. and um in the particular place that i get to work at, there is a huge amount of diversity of subject matter and projects to work on, and that's what keeps me going. if i only had a few projects to work on, then i would get bored -laughter-.  : ummm... uhh... well i guess a way of answering that is that there have been times when it didn't look as if there was going to be funding to do as many interesting things in the future, it seemed like funding was going to go down, but fortunately it hasn't. so i'm still totally interested in the subject matter, but the opportunities seem like there were going to be less : umm sure. -laughter- : yeah. i mean there is um, there's a... there's probably three people that have probably influenced me the most. one was [professor 1] and he was a mentor at [art school 1] and he really made me think... he told me i needed to play more and not to be so practical, and that i would be - i would take the impractical things i do and make them practical. and so that gave me the ability to trust myself that i can imagine things that other people don't, and when i say things sometimes people think i'm kidding but i'm serious -laughter-, and for me that gave me permission to sort of believe that, "no, those things actually could actually happen, i just need to allow other people to see a pathway for that to happen." umm... [person 1] was the person that i worked with at [university 1], and he's a long-term thinker. so he thinks in hundreds, if not thousands, if not millions of years, and that gave me a much different perspective on everything. and then a guy named [person 2], and he risks more than anyone i know. and he - he um... he has a way of allowing you to understand your place in the universe in a way that others don't.  : um yeah, as much as i can. i mean i don't teach at like a college but i do a lot towards um... you know i do lots of talks, and i try to do as many at universities you know when they ask as much as possible. i also get lots of email and i try really hard to respond to everyone, even if they're quote just, "students"… i try to respond especially to students, and they usually are pretty shocked -laughter- and i just want to be able to give them a moment and hopefully make some impact in their life.  : well i think to me it's just listening to their hopes and dreams and seeing if there's ways that i can make connections that maybe they don't see. : uhh... i think that's a hard one. i mean i can imagine that - i definitely have opinions on whether or not they - i think they would, but i don't know if that is ultimately true or not. cause people change and they make different choices, and some people who you think have no chance at all become amazing and others that you think are going to be amazing don't pan out.  : umm. i guess the only… let's see how do i say that... umm. so you mean like people who are established, or people who are up and coming?  : yeah. : yeah. umm, i don't know, i guess um... women usually tend to be able to connect to something on an emotional level better? i suppose that's a general stereotype. uh... i know how women uh need to kind of go out of their way to learn from each other and feel like they're um... feel like they're as useful and meaningful as everyone else, as their male peers. and um... yeah i think everyone works hard, or at least the successful ones and... i guess i don't break it down so much male and female as much as you know different personalities within that.  : well maybe so they uh - so they - yeah i know... i'm trying to work out various things in my head here and they may not come out all that well but... : so yeah i think you know it's a - especially in a technical field it's a male dominated world, and when you have alpha males in those type of areas then you know depending on the personality of the female, they could kind of get ran over or take it personally, but anybody can do that. doesn’t really have to be a male or a female. i just notice that women will start to bond together more and that's great! : because usually it's uh... if you are the 99% then you don't need to bond together. but if you are the minority then it is useful to get together and learn from each other and help each other. : hmmm yeah that's a good question. i guess you always have to make time for friends, for family, and doing something fun. cause otherwise if you're a - depending on your personality you may just work all the time and not, maybe it doesn't seem like it at the moment that it's important to do those things, but over time you find out that it's really important. so it's important to balance those things, otherwise you sort of become a one-dimensional person.  : yeah um i guess you know i sort of let the weekends be whatever it is that the family is supposed to do. i do have things that i have to do on weekends, but we plan that ahead. but i just don't... i sort of let my wife and family sort of decide whatever it is that we're going to be doing on the weekend -laughter-. i try to be home for dinner, that's usually a thing that i'm always - try to be home for dinner, and making sure that if we're going to go camping, that we go camping. -laughter- : umm my dad was a person that... both my parents they had no - they never tried to make me do anything. they let me sort of follow whatever it was that i was interested in. and when they saw that i was interested in something, they would help support that, and um my dad specifically, he was a person that, he had a couple funny phrases. one was, "if you have a will, then there is a way", and i kind of took that to heart, cause i have a will to do a lot of things -laughter- and i've been able to figure out how to get some of them done. and then he also said, "if you don't ask, you don't receive" and i took that to heart too. and so uh, there have been various moments that i... and actually that's part of our success at [workplace 1], we don't mind asking the quote, "stupid question" because we just want to understand. and i think that's freed me up to not worry about - you know is this a stupid question or not, but let's just ask it so you can understand, and you are better off that way than not asking. : umm... well.... i guess when i was at - well actually even before i went to art center, i think my wife was really...understanding of helping me do the things that i felt like i should be doing in the world... and she was supportive of that and she sort of gave up her sort of dream of - we used to live in [city 1] and umm we loved it up there and [city 2] was the last place in the world we ever imagined moving to and then we stayed. and so she kind of gave up the idea of which she had imagined that we would do, so that i can come down here and once i got the job at [workplace 1], we stayed. and i suppose i needed to get a job because we were having kids. -laughter- but i was fortunate you know to get the one that i got so, yeah.  : umm. i liked to be... i don't know, i did lots of stuff. i ran around a lot and i played lot of sports. i actually played on the computer a lot. i actually watched way too much tv, i would never let my kids watch as much tv as i watched -laughter-. but i think i enjoyed imagining things, and i always think back to this, we played wiffleball a lot and i came up with this whole idea of a whole wiffleball stadium, i made drawings for it, found a plot of land and, and so in my head i was like oh yeah we're just gonna talk to this person and they're gonna give us the land, we're gonna make this wiffleball stadium. : -laugh-: and for whatever reason we didn't end up pursuing that, but in my mind that was real and it was achievable and doable, and i don't think my friends thought the same thing -laughter-. : umm...sure. so i have two older brothers, two biological older brothers and a adopted sister. and my middle brother, he's a baker and he does amazing stuff in baking. he owns a bakery and his stuff is always really amazing. and um, let see. my older brother, he lives in the middle of [state 1] -laughter-. i don't see him all that much. i guess it depends on what you mean by creative, but he has somehow worked out an existence way out in the middle of nowhere and i would call that creative -laughter-.  : i try to find the essence of something or find "a" essence of something. umm there could probably be multiple i suppose, but um - or multiple stories and just trying to find something interesting that’s true about something, and then that usually sort of starts the whole process and i don't like to... if i don’t have to i try not to decide right away like what form it would be in, whether it's a printed thing, or it's a mechanical thing, or it's an experience or something like that. we just like to throw out lots of different ideas and see what happens from there. but it really kinda comes to the "what is interesting" about the subject. : let's see... uh. so when it's completed what do i do? : oh like what to do next? is that what you're asking? : well i don't... i tend.... i don't tend to... a lot of what i do is based upon other people wanting me to do something. and so it's usually whatever happens to fall on my plate -laughter-, usually. i mean there are things now that i want to do that i'm trying to not do other things... um, but usually it's when people come to me with a problem they're trying to solve, or they come to me saying they want some artwork or want me to do something, so. i don't tend to do something and say ok now i'm going to do this one because i feel like i need to do it. but that is different now because there is a project that i'm trying to make space for.  : well uh they are both super important -laughter- and i switch back and forth all the time, and through the entire process too. i mean there are times when rational needs to be maybe more important and the intuition maybe is at the beginning and then it becomes more rational. but umm i try to always keep things open and i am very fluid and so i don't mind if three-fourths of the way through that we change things dramatically if it makes it better and we can get it done on time and budget. but yeah so they're both super important. : i'm sure i have. i wish i had like super great example of that, but i know that happens. -laughter- : umm i guess it depends on your perspective but you know a couple times a year probably.  : i mean that's why i really enjoy doing lots of different kinds of projects because i can see how doing those other projects exposes me to people, experiences, materials, that i wouldn't otherwise get exposed to and then those can hopefully feed into other things i'm working on.   : um yeah. i mean i... i don't... i don't know. i don't tend to shut things off totally. i don't know. i guess there are times when i do try to shut things off but most of my life, i think of myself as a person with a lot of curiosity and trying to accomplish various things and so those things are always part of me wherever i go, and hopefully it opens up opportunities. you know when i'm doing a fun event with friends um that maybe i can finance or something in there. um i don't always think of it as work. i think of it as - it's all fun, it's fun to me, so. so my wife and i have had differences in opinion on that at times but i think she - i think we both come to understand each other a little bit better on that, cause maybe her work really is just work to her, and whereas i think of it as a state of being i suppose -laughter-. so i'm always trying to figure things out. i can't remember what your question was.  : well now she home schools. she was a, she majored in chemistry and then she got her whatever masters in education. and so she was a high school science teacher for a while, and then now she homeschools. : i think the first thing is just asking lots of questions. and trying to get as many perspectives on something as possible, um trying to understand the audience, trying to understand the subject, trying to understand the goals, and then hopefully all those different things really start to give a direction on what should happen. : i do i do sketch but i mean. i am super rudimentary so i'm not a - i don’t - i don't go through sketch books, i may just like doodle on a piece of paper. if someone wanted to do like a, you know, historical documentation on my life when i die, they're gonna be in trouble -laughter-. there is not a whole lot of stuff that i've left behind for that type of thing. but yeah so i tend to... sometimes i'll write out some words that i think are important, and then a lot of times i sort of look for reference for things, whether it's in nature, architecture.... something else that helps visually say the thing that i'm trying to get across. and then i'll sketch things. but i like to make little physical models, so i'll get some foam core and paper and uh pretend that they're thirty feet tall. and that sort of area that i tend to sketch ideas out. : how often do you redraft?: i guess all the time. i mean uh we're constantly iterating on ideas and going "oh what if we did this, what if we did that". i don't think i've done a project where - maybe - once of twice where i've done a project where like "oh that's it, we'll just do that". usually it's a whole process of trial and error.  : umm. i like, i like team when we uh have mindsets that work well together. my friend [friend 1] and i, we work really, really well together. and so we've sorta been creative soulmates for probably fifteen years or so... : i like to work with him. and you know, i collaborate with lots of different people. but so far now it's usually we always do things together and then work with other folks.  : i don't tend to like to just be by myself cause i - i work really well hearing other people's thoughts and then taking those ideas to a different space and then them taking my idea to a different space. : yeah that's in my world, i'm not a fine artist so usually there is a goal that i'm trying to accomplish. : um, i haven't. i mean my life is always sort of chaotic anyways so i never really have a routine. i suppose some people probably have routines that they need to break up –laughter-. mine's just chaotic all time, so.  : yeah : uh well i think a lot of times it's when i have a... like when i have intensity, or like there's a deadline, that’s when things start to happen, and then i'll work really hard and i'll be super exhausted and it'll all be done and then i'll sort of walk around in a haze. so that's usually when nothing is going on.  : and i think both of those are important. your mind just like a machine can't always be on and it needs to - it needs some time to rest and to make new connections. so after really intense period of time, you know that tends to be a good time to do something else, relax or go for a hike or something. : -laugh- uh... uh... um, like eighty-twenty, i don't know? something like that. yeah i mean again, you know i kinda feel like - i just kinda feel like most the things i do would be maybe considered work in some way but i don't always - i don’t always call it work.  : sure. i mean, uh uh... well i don't know. depends, like i try to exercise, so run and bike, and those tend to be good times to process things. i try to think of analogies as much as possible wherever i happen to be. so if i'm at a garden at night i see flowers and i try to go "oh i wonder how that would apply to whatever i happen to be working on." : -laughter- sometimes i have lunch... -laughter-. i don't know. i guess my way of totally relaxing is to watch sports or to watch a movie. but watching a movie isn't quite the same for me. like when my wife watches a movie, like she's totally embedded in the movie and i'm looking at the production design and, you know, thinking about the character, if i can believe them or not, -laughter- so it's different. but yeah i guess sports is a way for me to just not think about things very much. : uh. i mean. i guess i usually can probably say from eleven to six or seven, so whatever that is. seven-ish. yeah. close to eight sometimes. -laughter-interviewer: so now we're gonna move onto three key themes that we are investigating, and one of them is generation. so looking in the literature we see that - it seems that one of the best predictors of a creative product is simply just the number of products that came before it. does that strike a chord with you, in your process?: hmm, what do you mean by that? : um... well i think uh, you never know when you're gonna come up with something that's good or not. you watch movie directors who you think are amazing and then they have a dud, or a number of them in a row -laughter-. : so i guess, i guess, i dunno. i mean i suppose if someone is creative, you call them creative because they’ve had a past history of doing creative things. and someone who hasn't done things very creative, then you don't think of them in the same light. so i guess in that sense you would expect that there is a high probability that they'll do something good, but i don't put a whole lot of stock in that. just cause i know that the next project could be awful, so -laughter-. : mm... trying to think if i do... i don’t think so. i mean i guess i just look to see if it moves people or not. and um i don't have like a quantifier but it's more of just a general, you know, the more people i show, how do they respond to something. : um, i think my timelines on projects tend to be longer than others. so other people could probably produce things faster. my things also for whatever reason tend to be larger, so they're harder to put together and sell -laughter-. some people are really good at making small things that they can sell lots of.  : perhaps. i mean the thing about [workplace 1] is that they work on long-term projects and so that sort of defines... like my friends that would be in advertising or design, a long project for them is like two months –laughter-, and mine is like i could still work on it for two years and still not be done.  : uh, yeah i mean i always wanna like, "oh i wish it was just a little bit better here and a little bit better there", so i have that desire. but i think at some point i just let it go and go work on the next thing.  : hahah, when it's due, usually. -laughter- : um. well we try to cross ideas a lot. you know like if we have two different words and, whether it's like a city and an object, and then we start to think about that city and that object, and whether it's popcorn or tennis or something like that, and then how could you take the features of that city and make them feel like that object in a meaningful way. i guess we always want this little machine that would sort of - like a jackpot thing at a casino where you kina pull the lever and it puts three images together and the you like do something from that. did that help answer your question? : i don't know how to describe it, other than yes, i probably do. i, and it kinda goes both ways where you know like maybe the normalt - there's a certain amount of like things "normal" people get and can see real fast, make connections between, and then there - maybe i don’t - i can't see those or make those connections very quickly, but then there are other things that i can and i'm never quite sure what those things are. i don't - i can't say, "oh well these are the things that i'll make a connection that no one else will"... i just never know where those are. i just can feel it though, because i'll say something and people - i can just tell by their response whether or not they make that connection very fast.  : yeah i'm both. i get distracted but i can also close everything down, just say okay, i gotta do this. : i forget things quickly. so i will - well it depends - so nouns and numbers i don't remember, but verbs and adjectives, where describing things that way, i can remember that. so i can remember how someone made me feel, i can remember like did they move a lot, you know these other descriptors. but i can't remember their name, if they had a word on their shirt, i wouldn't remember it. if there was a number i would forget it immediately.  : i've never felt the need to have tools to help me remember the work that i'm working on. so, i guess no. : no : uh, i mean... i don't really even know how to answer that. i don't think of myself as being inhibited. but i am not super crazy, i guess maybe i'm uninhibited when i need to be, i suppose? : i mean i've never felt the need to like completely go outside of my norms to do something new.  : uh. i don't think, no, no, i don't think uh. people don't, i may characterize myself that way sometimes, but. no. i mean i'm pretty thoughtful, so.  : i can now. : oh um no. : no. : i think i just have more things to pull from than i did before. it's almost like - and also like i - my time of kinda doing work has crossed the boundary between before internet and after internet -laughter-, so. so i used to have to spend a lot of time tracking stuff down, and now, now it's like reading through what's there. and so i suppose that's a difference just in how do i start a project.  : i mean i suppose maybe i am a little bit less intense than i was before. part of that is that, part of it is that i have way more things to work on, to deal with now than i used to, so maybe i would have two or three projects and now i have twenty -laughter-. so i gotta decide what's gonna be the most important thing to do, and so i just have to be much more analytical about everything. um, but so before where i could be super intense on a coupe things, now that intensity is sort of spread around lots of different projects. and i think just in general maybe i am a little bit... maybe a little bit less intense than i was before. but as soon as i get on a project, i'm sure that changes.  : i guess uhh... depending on their - well deadline is one, and maybe another is the quality that it's at right now. and so, you know i want everything to be a ten, and so if something is near the deadline and it's an eight, then that's different if it’s a six, then you need to work on the thing that's a six.  : well i guess when i was first doing things, i was just hoping that i can do a project that i'd be proud of. and now i feel like i've been able to do a lot of projects that i am proud of. but i don't want that to make me complacent. cause i know a lot of people who have done really amazing things and over time their stuff is not that interesting later on in life. i don't want to be one of those people.  : um. i haven't felt it if i have.  : uh : i think it's just, maybe it's just feeling the... opening myself up to the possibilities of what could be is maybe greater now than it was before. i mean i've always - like i've mentioned, i've always tried to - have imagined things that i thought could be and maybe now i know, i have more connections now than i used to. and so my... my degrees of distance between the possibility of getting something done are smaller than they used to be, so in that i way i feel more confident in doing a bigger project than maybe i had in the past because i wouldn't know who to talk to and now i think i've been able to meet enough really interesting, connected people that if i had a big crazy idea, i could at least get to first base on it.  : um, probably that i have a belief in a god that cares about us. and once... and that's sort of a big reason why i care about bringing on wonder to people. and cause i think it, when you have those moments of awe, they're usually powerful and they have you ask questions about who you are, where you are in the universe, and why do you exist, and i always think that's a positive thing to be asking those questions. everyone sort of has that journey but it's easy to kind of get it stuffed inside of needing to get to work and doing your clothes and everything else.  : yeah i mean i think... i wanna... i hadn't quite thought of it this way before, i was never a boy scout but something about - i always remember when we cleaned that you’re supposed to - when you go camping it's supposed to be cleaner than when you got there. and in a way that’s what i want, i want to leave the world more beautiful and... just a more beautiful place than before i was here. and that goes for not only like aesthetic beauty but relationships and human interactions, that there's more beauty in the world because i happened to have been here than there was before i was here.   : that wasn't an hour and a half. : well cool. : so then what do you do with all that? do you guys like go back and, i know, i have a few different friends i know that have gone through this, [friend 2], he's a crazy guy.  : he's totally into - he's so fascinating. one moment he's doing fine art at the [art festival 1] which is like super fine-arty, and then he's doing - he like is [person 3] marketing director. you know, like how does that work? : yeah he's really cool, i just recently got to know him.  : uh, [person 4]... : he's an interesting fella. : yeah. what have you learned? i mean you've been doing all these interviews. do you feel like you have a different insight into creativity than you did before? : yeah –laughter- : okay. well great, thank you.  : um, no. : um, like project wise? creatively or entirely? : um...shoot. um, i guess... proud of... i guess... aw man... i mean i think its developing... developing like my kind of painting style... coming out of doing a lot of work, and then kind of summing it up in the paintings that i do. so, i can say maybe like a singular painting was like the first one i did, was this sort of cowboy painting, so it's like the first of a series of like many, many paintings, but for me, it was kind of coming up with these techniques in painting. : well, i think it was because i had, basically i was on, like when you're on a trajectory and i had this kind of synthesize... i had to step back and look at what my skills were and what was actually happening in what i was doing and i kind of synthesized it into these very graphic paintings and that in many ways it wasn't a step forward in like doing more, taking on bigger challenges, it was actually taking on a very basic, very mechanical challenge that was technically very hard and i had to develop the techniques, but it wasn't just like doing more. so, for me at the time, it felt like ten years ago, when i starting doing those painting it was like such a critical moment that felt kind of... i kind of grew into a practice. it was when i was like older and in my late 30's. : um... yeah i think it is... i mean it's interesting because it relates to like... that's a very difficult for me, the question of like what are you most proud of because i do feel like i'm so, i'm so part of being able to do what i do is like this... i have a sort of disassociation with what i make that i'm very experiential in kind of creating the work that i really... it's hard for me to have a sense of that idea of pride or value in the things that i make. not that i don't value them, and yes i feel pride, but i think not maybe in the way i feel that that question is kind of composed. like, oh, i'm very proud, i invented the iphone or something. i feel very much like when this leads to this, it leads to this which leads to this, so i'm glad of this because it led to this. and so, i feel like the paintings were a moment when i stopped and i looked at and i spent 6 months working on one painting, on and off. and it was like this experiment and it was failing and failing and failing and failing. that is what i am proud of, not of some success or something i maybe got recognized for. but, it was like critical and i feel glad to have kind of known at that time to like... kind of assess what i was doing in my work. : no, yeah. i think it was kind of like... i think there was... the economy had crashed... probably around 2008. i had 2 kids, so like... and that's not to say that it was a desperate time, it was a time when you stopped and assessed your values, so. so, i think it was like, for me, doing the paintings and working to my strength, or finding a strength is about like creating things that have value. so that’s like for me, creating things that have value is like living a life that has value. so, it's like creating like... creating art is about creating value, it's creating experience. if you value experience, it's like the making is the experience. things you make are... it's like there's a certain magic to art making, it's like you're making the things and now they exist, you know. and so, i feel like it was kind of engaging in that very directly as opposed to... and i think that, you know, it's also stepping away from doing work that wasn't giving me that too. so it's like... : um, it felt like i could just keep doing the same thing over and over. like it felt like i had created, i had invented, i had come up with a system that was engaging me. like an art making machine that was like engaging me that i was like in control of, was unique, was like very true to my way of thinking, like i kind of created an analog for something that happened very internally to me, so it was like making visible the type of thinking that i have all the time, so it felt like oh like i can just keep doing this, which is in a way that was like not that it wasn't about like doing this in a repetitive way but it was like i could mine these ideas, it's like i had a way to access a sort of poetry, like i come up with the language that this poetry is written in, so i had the poetry but i didn’t speak, i delivered it like becoming literate in this language for me to write this poetry : yeah it was i mean it doesn’t happen all the time like you can fake it and be like oh this was, you know i mean maybe i'm wrong (laughter) but no it is a unique thing. maybe it doesn’t happen, it only happens a few times in your life and i think, yeah it was definitely one of them. : i mean yes, i mean probably, i mean one i kind of came up with, like you know it's that like that moment then was a beginning of a development and then i've come up with different ways, like that type of work has actually changed the way i do everything so i then have, i'm coming up with different ways to articulate the same ideas that were generated by those paintings. so the drawings, like so the way i draw and come up with different ways of drawing oh how can i do this painting as a drawing or as one color ink works and then also it's changed the way like my design practice has functioned because those works became very for me obviously the strongest things i can make so then that kind of drove the other side of my work which is this kind of this design practice, and so. but yeah your question is more like has it happened again and i think in small ways but not the same sort of like full paradigm shift  : um... maybe... i think it’s... to a certain degree it's, like being, like it’s a strength and an obstacle but i think growing up, i guess growing up in isolation in [country 1] there's a type of i think there's a, like the ability to kind of like see beyond just sort of, to have an understanding of like what was kind of possible for me and i think it's an obstacle i think that by being isolated that also made me like the tools to overcome that isolation, that it was like being independent but that is, it wasn’t like maybe it wasn’t the isolation it was the sort of lack of like encouragement or maybe like i guess i mean like i didn’t have like role models really so like that i could relate to and i feel like that would be maybe that was like good too, maybe that’s not exactly an obstacle.  : yeah like i came to [state 1] for grad school so it was kind of like coming out of, i definitely chose, like the choices i made were sort of like poking around in the dark like knowing what i wanted to do but not being super clear about it. : um i mean i always think that i have like benefited from kind of like working to like kind of my inner circle that like a big shift for me was creating work that was totally relevant for like my own microcosm and i kind of came out of that doing work as a kid for my friends. like if a friend has a band, i would make t-shirts and then i would make a zine (magazine ?) and then you would kind of growing and the circle kind of spins outward from your inner circle and i think once i went to grad school and then graduated school i had to relearn that when it came time to have my first show and have showing my artwork, it was kind of like remembering like oh work that inner circle and spin out from there and stay and like kind of do work for your friends or for the people that understand your current context and then that will translate, it actually does resonate and translates out and that is something of value. because i think like the obstacles that i've had are the, for me like i'm very kind of facile with like making imagery or like working hard and things like that, none of that came hard for me but when you have a lot of options, like kind of visual options or use, i was interested in doing all these different things. it was kind of like being able to have focus and like narrow things down and like be decisive, so it's like those tools of decisiveness like it's almost like the tricks i pulled on myself guide myself at the times when it was basically up to me which like feels like almost all the time, those are the things i feel like really have given my work value because it's that kind of decisiveness rather than maybe some sort of like skills or visual inventiveness or something which is what my work looks like but like coming to that work or having that work be effective in context or be something that, or be able to work under the sort of pressure that feels very confident in my world then those things like the tools of decisiveness i feel like are the most valued.  : kind of like taking on um challenges, and like making a decision that my work was, that like the work itself is reinforced, the work is better for decision making. so to make the work clear, like if i have like a goal that i'm reaching for that is about sort of clarity or legibility in the work, so by having that it's like you are, it's the kind of opposite sort of like a collage or broad spectrum of like imagery or ideas or forms like then the viewer then amalgamates or gets something, it was like when i started making (inaudible, ~16:50), no i'm going to do all of that, i'm going to decide and i'm going to deliver these very kind of reductive refined imagery and that work was going to have to function, it could fail, it could function. so it was like i set up this kind of decisive process oriented way of working and then that i saw how like that was like also reflected in then what work i take on, well what project will i do, what emails will i respond to, and in the moment of kind of pressure where it was like there's so many times in art making or in design where you basically just have to invent on the spot, like you just have, it comes down to like you have an hour, you know, it's like imperfect schedule or imperfect kind of situations are the norm so it was kind of like that, that nature of working in the creative environments that i've been in are about like being also kind of (inaudible word, ~18:02) demand decisiveness so i think i thought if like, oh well this is kind of what i'm seeing, this is kind of what i see are the demands, well how does that equal like the big experiment, the large arch of my work is about well how does that affect what i make, what is the, like as much as i'm in control of the product, what does my context, like what does this world, what is the ideal way of working that this like kind of, what is the product that like yes i'm involved in but what is the (incomprehensible, ~18:44-18:48), like i have my own process but the process fits in within a larger system of whether it's like delivering a show for a gallery or delivering artwork for like a magazine cover or something, so like what does that demand of the situation, how do they affect my own process so i kind of came to like this way of working quickly and again the kind of clarity and also basically revisiting the same ideas over and over again in different ways. so this sort of like repetition, so it's kind of like a combination of always staying in the same place, it was more like instead of like lateral movement it's more like a meditative practice where you just try to go deeper and deeper down into a world rather than covering ground that is like takes a lot of energy and takes you farther from where you started and you kind of are always starting again as you move forward in space, so.  : hmm yeah i mean i think that, i don’t think i think specializing late is better if you're going to specialize. i think like an awareness, i think it's like don’t, i think it's like keeping in mind like don’t, there's times to work towards your strengths but don’t assume what those strengths are. you know, like you have to, like it's like finding those strengths in the world is part of the job and then social contacts, i think it's over, i mean i'm kind of a social person or i definitely like navigating the world through my work and trying to meet contacts, i like definitely engage in that process to some degree. i don’t know if i'm super social. um i think that if it's like a very, i think it's more about like a natural like having like a natural sort of movement, not forcing it. and i think it's also surprisingly like for me my behaviors have been reinforced by like when you follow your instincts and you sort of like place an idea in your head, like having a sort of goal, having like an idea like oh something you want to do that the world will offer you a path if you open your mind to that and then i definitely had, there was a lot of things about me that, like starting off i was kind of focused, like i did have i kind of para-focused but within that para-focus there were actually really really a lot of options to grow. so, to answer like to having a focus early or later like i was like compared to maybe some people i was super focused but within that focus i didn’t assume the outcome, like i just kind of view like i was going to invent my own way of working, my on vocation, my own description of who i was as a creative person. like i wasn’t going to assume that by being a designer or by being an artist or sort of labeling myself or, like i'm always kind of trying to think like well, you know, it’s a combination of like, it’s a little bit like there's two parts to this question it's like, ideally work in a vacuum but don't, but you're not in a vacuum and acknowledge you're not in a vacuum, it's kind of a combination. : i mean i think it's... for me personally or like for everybody?  : i mean i definitely, i mean i have, i just think, i think that’s (inaudible, ~23:42) like a creative like, my view of the world is through the lens of a sort of creative thinker or critical thinker and now the father i think i have inadvertently or whatever the case that i see in my kids what i expose them too and i see their, like it's almost like reflecting, they are reflecting back those kinds of values that are rooted in creativity and thinking that goes on in my studio and that becomes home and it offers a world view and it offers, it definitely offers a way of you know as a parent seeing, one thing is like you are to make these decisions for your kids but then you're also exposed to other kids and then their parents and you see like oh i forgot that there's all these options, you know you're like there's all these options, there's different ways of thinking and approaching things and it becomes very obvious that for me in my way we're like full of creative people who view everything kind of experientially or sort of from a creative, like our values are reflected and one of those values is kinda creativity like criticality or something … so i mean i see and i'm glad, like i'm not like oh shoot i wish like i'd... you know that i was a different person. like i'm happy for my kids, i don't feel like oh this is going to put them down the wrong path, it definitely is going to put them down a path but i think that it doesn’t mean that they just have to be artists so i think there's something to that. like i think there is a way to navigate the world as a, you know i think that a balanced life comes from part like an understanding of the sort of creative thinking and like an art life but that can also like it's so powerful i think like art thinking applied into the world of science or technology or maybe something that is maybe distant from art thinking, i don't know what that would be but i think that’s an asset so there's something to that. so it's either like art thinking as an artist (inaudible, ~26:23-26:26) if you choose to be a farmer or a i don’t know mathematician, that all your strengths in creativity and abstract thinking or problem solving in an art context i feel are legitimate strengths.  : art stuff? : um... i mean i'm really engaged in non-art stuff too so, i mean so all the time like i think you know i will you know, you know uhh, i think i'm not like, like definitely if i'm like spending like we will go away for july in the summer... we go to chicago and we go to the beach. it's very much like a, very much like a family vacation and like getting away and as much as like i bring art making like i bring sketchbooks and i bring art making supplies and a lot of the work i've done comes from that time in the summer like kinda things i've made come from that moment. it's also like a time where i will like go days and days without drawing and i really feel like i'm really outside of like a sort of art space. i'm not like dying to get back to the studio and i feel like that's constant, like i'm always doing things like i'm splitting my day in a kind of like art context and a place that's devoid of art. like one of the things i'm interested in is like sports, like individual sports, like trail running, cycling, and things and one of my takes on it, cause i don’t understand it totally but i really like being in artless environments. i find like those kind of very like aesthetically unpleasing sort of worlds where like you don’t feel like anybody's an artist, i really kind of love it and i don’t know exactly, it's like it's not a fully formed thought but i sense it you know that when you're in these sort of places where you kind of like dealing with like oh wilderness awareness, the weather's really important, your fitness, nutrition, like all these, like there's this like this world, like this is how you go trail running or ski mountaineering and stuff, where there's like the values are all kind of very mundane sort of mechanical, very of the world non like it's not we're not in the world of ideas and i'm drawn to that stuff and i don’t, and i think it's just because it's fun and its interesting and it's engaging in a very typical way (incomprehensible, ~29:47-29:49) but i think for me personally i think like okay i can feel like when i'm on the starting line of a running race or something that like there's no other artists here and i don’t know that but there's very small races and they're kind of like a little bit esoteric and i think like there is something of that sort of you know and i think that relates to the question a little bit of like being outside of kind of like art world you know but i don’t know, you know, i live in [city 1] which is like the super, it's like, it is like in the world, it’s like a creative, like creativity is like very like respected here and it's part of the culture and i do wonder like if i lived somewhere else where that wasn't the case whether it's a city that values banking or other things more, i don’t know what that would be like, that would maybe be a little bit like where i grew up in [city 2], [province 1]. oil towns.  : i mean i'm kind of like a 9 to 5 artist so i work like i come earlier than that, i come at like 7:30 or 8 in the morning to the studio and i'm here and i have lunch in the middle of the day, but yeah i just kind of work 'til five, come home for dinner, don't work on the weekends so i'm very like regimented um and during that time there'll be parts of the day where i'm maybe, like there's different types of things going on in the studio for sure but i kind of, i try to make it so that when i'm in the studio i really try to you know, selfishly i want my time here to be not doing emails or and like i really do like it to be creative time that i'm actually making things, those are kind of good days.  : uh... i mean... probably, yeah i think, i mean i think that one of the reasons i've liked to do like a lot of very commercial work like working with directors or working with brands and um like doing kind of projects and one of the things is it's kind of like, it helps from like kinda alleviate the kind of isolation of the studio, but i think i definitely follow, like i kind of was part of a group show called [show 1] that was in, it was around, it was around the early 2000s, so it was kind of a group of kind of like suburban guys, a lot of guys who were making work that kind of came up out of subculture of the 80s like skateboarding and surfing and i feel like that was really influential. it was like me being able to grow up so different than me, but were kind of like, really they were doing kind of what i was starting to do in having shows and kind of having a studio but they were a little bit maybe more, they fleshed it out a little more than i had and so that was a like a big change. it opened me up to kind of taking what i was doing seriously and being included in a show was a pretty big deal cause i could've just easily not been in the show but i was and it kind of, yeah that was really encouraging... yeah and i've had worked with the director spike jones a lot over the years and i kind of feel like his sort of like again kind of sharing some history and kind of like seeing, being able to really sort of understand his thinking and kind of like view his, he's really really different from me but i feel like i definitely got something out of that collaboration in a way that is unique so, most collaborations you kind of don't actually... in a way that’s almost like guaranteed, like most of it is like just kind of a wheel spin but once in a while you'll get a little thing and then i've learned things from you know, i've learned certain things from like working with [brand 1]or something, a brand as a thing, as an entity, like what do you learn from them, what do you hate about them, what do you, you know, that is, i think that is in some ways shaped the way i work. : um... i feel like his, sort of he... agreed to work in different worlds. like so he was working in a kind of hollywood world, he was also working in an advertising world, and then stayed working in the world where he came from which was out of uh skateboarding and doing music videos and things. so he was engaged in these different worlds but stayed conceptually consistent. so it was kind of a conceptual practice and that he would apply the same concepts to different worlds. like the worlds would change but the work would stay the same and i really feel like oh that’s like a totally winning way to work um and that, then it was just kind of like who you work for, like he was, he advised me early on like just, you know, like who you work for is really important obviously... but yeah it was about that kind of conceptual practice, and you know i think what he does and was doing was kind of a much louder version of what i was doing like for me... like the work was more maybe personal and little more, yeah just kind of a little quieter. he was going for like a more sort of, i don’t know more broader, not a broader appeal but like he's more ambitious.  : yeah i mean i think that i kind of stay, i really, i try to stay kind of public and i like to kind of put work out in a way that i feel like kind of participating in the world that i, like my work exists in and i have, i do talks and have students come to the studio. i think i balance it because i think that so often it's kind of like i think that there is a limit, like it's some of the stuff kind of a waste of time and i've had schools kind of waste my time. i don't teach, i've done classes and i have taught in the past but i feel like it's kind of, that’s not my calling but doing talks and stuff i think i have definitely, i think that’s been good. : i mean i've always thought that and i might be wrong but when i sit down to kind of write talks (incomprehensible, 39:17-39:18) i'm sort of writing about the creative process, like that’s what i feel like is interesting about what i do, and i don’t know if that necessarily true but i feel like, well anyone can look at my work, you can just google me, so i feel like what's interesting is to talk about the way i work and i feel like that is sort of unique and then that is maybe, you know it's kind of um, that is, like it explains, like i feel like how i work... um, kind of explains like what the work is in a way that is more interesting than kind of like going through project by project, like this happened and this happened. like i think it's like i like to reveal sort of like the consistency in the work and then where it comes from. so like my most recent talk was just about drawing and what i think of drawing, like how i view what drawing is to me and then what my like, like what my approach is, like what i'm thinking of when i draw as like this is like my system of creativity and have like revealing that kind of like being really sort of didactic. : um yeah i feel like i can  : well i feel like if you're distracted at all you'll just, you just won't keep going, you know, like i think it takes a sort of... a focus. like if you didn’t, if i'm watching, like if you're looking like at an ant and you know the ant is like the anthill, like you know like an ant is going to get the anthill and it's like a block away and if you're looking and the ant is right next to you, ants are really strong and they don't need much water, ants can totally walk really far but if you look at the ant and in the first three steps it pauses, or it goes in a circle and then keeps going, you’re like oh you're done. you know like it's just like it's just mass, i just see too many circles and ants only live for like days like that’s it, you know, and i mean that’s like pretty pessimistic but there is a sort of, and it's not like that means the person is going to like be a failure, it means they're gonna, there's just gonna be something else that comes along, like there's just gonna be, like for the ant it's like they're going to come across a little crumb, they're going to come across a little (inaudible, ~42:14) or something that’s like better than the anthill because they're checking things outs and they're wondering around taking their time, it's not like direct. i feel like art making or sort of like studio, being like a studio person is pretty, like it takes like a kind of you have to kind of direct.  : um... like how they, their practices, or? : i mean yeah for sure i mean i feel like um... i mean definitely in my world there's like so many like there's so many shows where it's like all guys or like i'm working on a project in the type of kind of commercial projects i do that are, like oh it's like a special edition of t shirts for [brand 2] or you know these kind of like art projects that are like commercial projects or something, it'll be like all men and i feel like that is from my time, like this time, like coming out of an era where this kind of guy oriented sort of not thought through and i think there's, i think it's definitely, yeah you cannot like there's stuff like that going on, there um... yeah i think women operating are kind of, i mean that at a very high level, i think i don’t know, i mean it's... yeah i mean i think i definitely just noticing a difference in, yes.  : hmm... um... i think it would be, i mean i think, that is like a total interest to me, like i've been, i feel like that’s like the ongoing experiment and i think that it... is like any, like i think any in our society, like one, our values are partial reflected in how much balance in our life we have, values of our society are reflected in that and i think that’s something, there's certain, so i think it's like being aware of like um... how much is like decisions you're making for yourself, like oh like i'm really ambitious or like i'm making a film, so if i make a film that means that means like this amount of equipment, this amount of time, traveling or being away from my family or whatever and then how much of you are just reflecting back the values of your society. like definitely there's times when i have to work really hard and i don't see my family or i can't get away or something and then there's times where it's like, oh i'm just, this is actually a choice i'm making, i'm making a choice that i cannot get away this week for two days because i just could be working or should be working and i think like understanding that like being able to like step back and make an assessment, it's again back to the decision make those decisions like, don't let life just happen to you, you know like let, like make those decisions, if you're working really hard just be aware like okay. you know i think like it's almost easier if you're a filmmaker and it's like we're shooting in alaska for six months. like you're just in alaska for six months and then it's up to you like oh i'm in alaska, oh i'll have some days off so i'll go to the glacier, but as like a studio artist like that is all kind of up to you, that’s just you should have balance but advice on finding that balance is... don’t be, i think it’s a sort of having, like assess your reality, you know. and then there's, i think i definitely come to the idea like there's no, there's never going to be perfect, you're never going to have enough time, you're never going to have like this window of opportunity so you have to make those windows for yourself to either get away or get the work done in a short period of time or whatever is the case.  : um... i think, i mean, i think that like it kind of, like i think that, i'm half chinese and i'm half irish, growing up in [country 1] like my parents, like my mother's parents were immigrants, my father's parents were second generation irish and i think there's a sort of, and then growing up in [country 1]  i felt like kind of like i viewed everything as like a little bit like i felt like oh i have to interpret these things because none of it feels like native to me. i think like a skill for like interpreting or like seeing the world as sort of like interpreting things for myself and like kind of having to like search for context. i think that was a skill that i take with me like looking closely at how culture moves or how what things are, sort of way of reading things. i think growing up... i mean i like grew up in like a suburbia like suburban place like just sort of anonymous and my dad was a lawyer and my mom was a teacher, sort of like this very generic sort of like very typical place where sort of like a blank slate in many ways and i think that that was like i think there was a lot of risk in that, i think like a loss, my friends and people around me it didn’t really work like i think it was a, i don’t think it's like a place where art thrives but for me, like it definitely like, i see how i am a product of that and so i don’t know if it helped it definitely leads to sort of like a unique, what's the opposite of unique it's like petri dish or something for kind of having the room to kind of invent who i want to be, or something.  : yeah i mean... maybe i think it's like lack, if you don't understand like a... (start of transcription on the fly because recorder died)

interviewer: in what way(s) do you think your family background was special in helping you to become the person you are? : it was also hard because it took me a long time to come to an understanding of what i’m doing at all and there’s something that there’s positive to that. feeling like um there is some room in that… not feeling like being allowed to find my own vocation, i wasn’t thinking i want to be this i want to go to this school i was clueless. i think there is something that is...i see a value in that. : i seek advice from my wife. strategically i’ll ask her about certain things and certain decisions. there’s some consistency. being married and having apartment, and her view is really. i don’t have to do things… we don’t agree. but the consistency of her opinions are really valuable. having kids change your perspective... helped me focus and be really more i took everything more seriously.  : my dad went to art school and then dropped out when my mom got pregnant, so he draws and went to become a lawyer. was a social worker and then later went back to school to become a lawyer to support our family. my mom is not creative but my brother is kind of computer-y but doesn’t pursue it in any way… so no one really.
 : generally it comes from drawing… so i kind of like sit and draw. once in a while i’ll just kind of have an idea that comes out of the blue type idea and those are usually sort of - that’s not really - once in a while they’re kind of interesting. but it kind of comes out of drawing and making things that lead to things that lead to other things… : i like to have a few things going at once that are different scales. i’ll be working on a larger project that are big or simple. there’s works that are more like play and others that are challenging or of consequence. i like to have a number of things in play... like shark-like or always swimming. the satisfaction of starting and finishing things in one sitting. i often switch from a larger project and do quick ones, things i can do in the moment. but i do line that stuff up. and learning how to balance that, not having too much lined up and going ooh and stuff that can go wrong but having other stuff happening. 
 : i mean totally that happens all the time. one of my techniques of drawing is just don’t stop. don’t stop and look back and see what you’re doing. in the moment it’s hard, it doesn’t make it any easier to stop. i make something that is of no consequence. usually that stuff remains of no consequence (not like those are a revelations). i think while doing and let me think while i make it. : umm yeah i mean probably i lean towards intuition. i think there’s so many with the way that i make things, the quantity of things i make, what the things are - they so rely on making constant decisions and failing, some of those decisions you’re trained on what you’re going wrong or going right. sometimes i’m not an expert like i don’t know. sometimes there’s rational right or wrong, you recognize before there’s a mistake and before you make a turn and tap into your intuition.  : no i don’t. i thought about it. i often wonder how productive i am and how many hours did i spend being creative in the day, so i have an abstract sense but i never actually quantified it.  : i have no sense of that. : i feel like i’ve created this false system like that’s how that’s done, i decide there’s this image—when it comes to a painting, this is an image i’m producing. so when you design something, you’re looking to the process for the answer, it’s a false or when it’s in image making or art making you can go on forever or done. i’ve created these false or not false -  i mean it’s like uh i make it just like the work is open to being done when i’ve started. so eventually it will be obvious when it’s done. 
 : not real strong. i mean once a work is finished, i stop seeing it in the light of a thing i can touch, there’s these brief - that’s why it’s hard for me to step away from paintings, i’ll lose that sense. when i step away from a painting, it's not done but hard to access - i’m going to touch this painting and take it to finish. when you’re working on it it feels obvious and i can do it… it’s like a crazy thing. it’s kind of akin to when paintings are damaged… in the artist's studio it’s ok but in the gallery it’s like a disaster. totally strikes a cord in my process. yeah the quantity of doing things and the repetitive activity and the more you make - the more you make, more the lack of hesitation feels really important to making things.
 : more. a lot more yeah. 
interviewer: spend more or less time on each work than others?: more time.  : um i - well i mean - well one thing i’ve noticed that’s almost like a plan - since i work in those coil books, the idea is that i use the books and can always go back and refer to them, and i have this - i’m saving this thought - it’s sort of chronological, and i keep going page by page but i switch projects and keep going in the same book and these become a pile of records, but i never go back to the books, it’s a record. i don’t use them. i keep doing new work. that work is theoretically documented or material or something, but what i find is just placing the work in the books, i’m not someone that has a good memory but i am filling this massive amount of info and i’ll see sometimes i repeat things or take on from where i left of of something years ago and revisit it in a way as if i had gone back to the book. i think that’s kind of interesting. this sort of visual memory or yeah it’s like memory. because so much of my work is playing with the same ideas or about setting forth the same tasks of inventing imagery or something. : hm, i think so. i mean i feel like i can - i can - i’m able to speak about things - i can speak about something that is really hard to say but i can say that thing with an image. so because i have like this imagery at my disposal i can say things that are widely understand, but because we don’t have a language for it… but i do, i have this sense that i have a language for it. it’s not the same as having a genius idea or something super clever, but it’s oh here’s a thought we all have. but i’m the only person i know of that can say it like this. uh so it’s like a familiar idea but no one has the ability…  : um i think i’m both. yeah i mean i think that you know it’s being able to - i think there's times when i have to defocus, you know, it’s about like oh i have to be really almost like not myself as i like draw, or draw or proceed with something. and there's times where it’s like intense focus, like oh i have to turn off the music or something, and i feel like i’m comfortable in both ways of operating. i see it as a balance and oh defocus and stop and recognize what is happening and synthesize, and now from there i’m going to go here, and then you defocus and then oh! from that unto here. it’s recognizing - i mean it is like if i was always focused i’d feel like so bored i would be - it’s the defocus aimlessness feels to essential and then at the same time i feel like i have to be - the demands of productivity are constant. it’s like constantly you’re djing - you’re turning the dial, turning it up a little more bass, phase it out. you’re manipulating your own cognitive traits. you have them - it’s like having an effective control over them, and at times it hurts and like aaah i’ll be mad and i just have to know don’t be mad, this is part of it, it’s part of it. it’s more like i have to interact with the gallery or some email that comes in. i have to switch gear and function as a artist that you are in the world, you know. i embrace that - i agree i’m going to engage in this stuff on my own. i’m not going to have people do this for me. that’s the kind of stuff that gets painful. i mean it’s typically painful in that things aren’t going right or everything i’m doing today sucks. but that’s more normal like creative, that’s kind of what you get in the creativity life. if you find that’s creativity is essential to functioning in the world, that’s expected. lie, i have other things that are more appealing with the world that can be frustrating. that is more big picture - like picture (the gallery stuff), it’s more like switching way of thinking when you’re dealing with gallery stuff.  : i retain things.  : -laugh- i don’t think anymore. i feel like that was when i was a kid - um i don’t feel like now - i mean i don’t know i guess some people do.  : yeah i always find myself - like i’ll really eat the same thing for lunch everyday and never go back. i don’t like habits but i have like these habits creativity - creative habits, like it’s like you occupy a familiar space and use that to go to someplace new. so there - is it - is like - i think it is that. it sounds familiar inhibiting habits and then also rely on habits to keep momentum or something? : no

interviewer: do people say you are compulsive?: no

interviewer: do people say (or do you feel) you have “adhd”?: no
 : i mean i look back and can kind of see the thing, and i think i’m way more effective and direct. i’m much more - there’s less wondering in my work. 
 : uh i feel like i work harder now, i don’t know. i think there is sort of - i expect more from my work. i think that’s an escalation, i need to figure out how i feel about it.  : i like my work much more now - i feel like i’m more happy with my work now. 
 : um hm, i mean - i think - i mean when it comes to my mind or the mind, i do wonder mentally like - i don’t know about me or for me there's kind of like how the relationship to reality. what my relationship to reality - i do wonder how it’s my understanding other real world and when i’m making - like i had said like when i draw something i’m making it. my understanding that if i feel that way it's unique to me - someone might say you drew a picture of this thing, you didn’t create something that’s an image of this things. it’s a sliding scale - like if i draw a pic of an apple as an artist… as an artist if i draw an apple i’m like halfway to an apple. or if you’re a viewer you're not going to engage that was. and how it is for a viewer that’s surrounded by images.  if i'm creating images or living in a world of images and how does that relate to reality and how i make choices in that state. i do wonder about stuff like that. you know, like how much a creative life, artist life defines your choices. like you don’t come to it like your choices but it defines your choices you make moving forward. and this is something i’ve noticed. i’m forty-six years old. i feel like if you’re settling into or assessing habits constantly, these sorts of things are of interest to me. 
 : hello? : hi [interviewer] how are you? : you're welcome : sure  : i can hear you perfectly  : well my kids being parent : i didn’t quite say i have succeeded i am succeeding it its just a i guess the highest form of pride because it’s the most difficult thing : probably leaving [home country] i wouldn’t call it an obstacle but uh it was surely something that set me free  : the challenge was of course breaking away from my comfort zone and its tough and its painful to be away from so many of things that make me and that make me happy and that make me feel at home and you know at home within myself but i also felt instinctively i needed that some distance in order to be a bigger person so to somehow go elsewhere and really face the challenges of life and of course life without the comfort of or the discomfort but similarity in my own country near my family surrounded by the things i knew and surrounded by the assumptions i was probably expected to make : at first i moved in 1993 then i came back 4 years later and moved away again in 2003 : and i've been away since : well i think that somehow when the learning started i consider my career a process of learning my art is really it’s a means to situate myself in the world and understand or try to understand reality and my passage through life with only material, psychological affective etc characteristics so its i'm still in a learning curve and uh its it was very important for me to somehow be able to ask myself some of the important questions of my career and without a series of presences and assumptions  that somehow spelled out some answers and maybe drifted me away from the real from the crux of the problem so yes i took a step sideways and i'm not saying this was something that was exceptional of i just myself i think that it is a condition for a lot of artists at least a lot of practitioners that house somehow similar approach to mine being away and being on the move and able to base certain conditions and being able to reflect the distance i think are quite healthy and sometimes necessary conditions to really assess the uh questions of art or the question of what it is to be to be an artist  : that’s true yes and it’s i mean contemporary art can be a little bit of a dialect in its own right so in a sense no matter where you are if you're in the milieu of art there's certain set of assumptions that say again but it's all the nuances of the context that really shed light on the immediacy of the different problems and all the ways about the practice that i think uh make it important make it urgent make it challenging so you know i just mentioned context and i think as far as the way i practice my art it is very context responsive and i think one can only remain context responsive if one is changing environment and you know not all of the time but enough times that you know you can take some distance and reassess questions and really speak from what they are and not hear your own voice so much and your own echo and the echo of the people that you know and the context that has seen you develop etc. so   : yeah : i cannot boil it down to one : no when i say my practice is process of learning i can only speak of partial and conclusions and i can only speak of moments of great importance but that i can never isolate from a sequence so i would never be able to boil it down to one thing : um i think it's really crucial to trust one's instincts because ultimately that is what is that is what the driving force is the world is becoming more and more connected and somehow cultures becoming a little bit leveled because of instant communication and i think it is precisely because of this that one's uniqueness and one's choice becomes or remains a true tool so i think it's very important to just trust ones instincts and to be oneself  : of course now what that means is something that i cannot really say in one sentence because if i go back to what i was saying earlier context is also very very important you are what you are but as soon as you move a bit you know you move the air around you and somehow you know light sheds differently on you so in a sense you become a little bit of a different person and i think it's one of the paradoxes that you know one can carry one's own identity and one's own self but then of course context makes ones one being a slightly different self in different circumstances : well i when i look back at when i started i don’t know exactly when to say this is when i started  : but if i look back 15 years to when i was beginning to exhibit internationally and i see myself now i mean traveled a very long distance i can say i'm you know quite a different man and  quite a different person many things have happened to me so i look at life and i look at myself and i look at my career differently but i think some of the basic principles are still what mean would vary in the beginning are still driving me i take great inspiration in the life and work of other artists and i still remain very inspired somehow look at the life and work of some of my yeah of some of the people in my field and try to imagine myself as being in some sort of genealogy of fields that ultimately hopefully matters  : well i think being an artist is an opportunity to look at life with a certain vitality to really try to imagine other possible worlds and to so with such force that these really you know change lives and they become they are worlds of great potential so this is something that i have acknowledged and recognized in the life and work of artists you know throughout time some of whom i have witnessed closer than in other cases but yes i mean this is something that i feel is life mission and is also a really exciting opportunity and a really exciting way to somehow be in the world and look at the world : sure yes i think it's really through the lens of art that i have learned the most valuable things and that i hope to continue and this lens of course it's one that comes with great engagement and some sacrifice it's really the only thing that i could see myself doing : well it's important for me and i only ever speak in first person singular what's important or me may not be important for other but what i do know is that when i have experienced great art i very often get the feeling that this person who makes the work is somehow how can i say this making it for me and uh and its only because that person made it entirely for him or herself so like acting in first person singular that it is because of that i can totally connect because there is that immediacy there is that feeling of life there's no distance there's no mediation and this is what i this is what i would aspire with my work as well when i say i speak in first person singular i don’t do make any assumptions about you know what people see how people one of the people should imagine but i would hope that by me giving my version of the world with all my engagement i can communicate this in a very direct way so that it touches the others in this very direct way without assuming that it would if you see what i mean i think that is one thing about creation also its you know we all live in the world of course it somehow should not come from you know it assume nothing it shouldn’t come from anywhere except from the inside of each person  : its exactly because of both  : i am.. i do consider there is a clear ethic in what i do and sense of responsibility in this engagement that i have mentioned before and naturally i get a lot of joy from what i do i don’t have to reward myself in any other than with the joy and reward my work gives me and sometimes it's you know when i hear myself saying its work i think well is it really work because many other people consider is like a duty and then aside form that duty they can devote part of their persona and of their life to joy but for me it comes in one and its really for that joy for that reward that satisfaction that i do what i do and naturally i want to communicate that i want to share it and part of my responsibility and my ethics has to do with the fact that i feel also a privilege socially allowed to work exactly in my own terms and with my own timing and then i would hope that i can pay back society with my findings and you know someone find them relevant and touching  : well by watching aside from being same by watching other artists life and work and feeling that that just relevant thing to be alive for so   : i have had very good teachers throughout my life and i feel very fortunate about this i don’t necessarily have a problem with authority although of course it being an artist implied a certain vitality   and freedom i don’t have a problem with having let's say figures that can be my temple and completely had them not just in my art but i had them through life in my childhood etc i have had many many figures that i have looked up to and i certainly would hope that i can still do so because if i want to continue learning i think it's important to be able to have this you know to do to look up to someone or to look up to something you know  : um well i think good teachers i learned from example rather than from dogma so teachers who are you know original and generous and original in their view about life and generous in the way that they communicated and generous in the transmission of knowledge i think that what makes a good teacher  : and transmission of knowledge of course implies tradition i also think that its important to learn certain traditions because what this implies the passing on of information and of models and it's only really only when you learn that you can bend it in our own way : well they cover the spectrum of the creative process anything from the sort of high and abstract and transcendental aspect about it the philosophy about it down to the very tangible and physical solution of you know using this material instead of this other own or resolving something with a quick gesture rather than a slower paced approach so it’s a very wide arch of exchange i think that goes on when you speak to a mentor because the creative process just covers a very very very wide arch : i think it is yes and i find that a couple times a year i have an opportunity to talk to students or to young artists i don’t have a teaching position but i get a lot of reward when i have the opportunity i learn of course also because you know i see myself in these people and i hear myself talking to them and that's of course a moment in which i can reassess my own position and you know if i can say things with clarity to others and about others that somehow makes me feel that things are shifting into my own head yes it is important to mentor others : i am most interested in really in trying to make them see their specificity and of course i'm interested in discovering that it's very exciting to see others in my field who are probably coming of age and then realizing there's something unique something strong a great potential i love seeing that and naturally if i do i feel the yeah but i have to point it out and i would like to find a way to foster that or to make them realize they have to foster exactly that  : i think yes very often i see people who are there and they are fully engaged and they are full of potential and they are here for the right reasons and likewise often you see the opposite and the opposite can be the opposite in many different ways i guess like in many other professions if you’ve been at it for a few years there are certain things that you can predict there are certain moments you wish you were wrong  because there's a feeling of empathy and you know i don’t think there's a that much of a difference in the art that as i practice as in other forms of creation when it comes to that it is a very difficult life project and it sometimes you know in the early stages there are glimpses whether someone has what it takes to carry or someone is clueless or dishonest or is there really not with his or her heart you know  : differences of what kind yeah of course there are lots of differences in that sense like : in their chances to make it or  : well yes they are not entirely differences of gender but sometimes you see similar problem that is a approached with nuances that you just feel to come more from a woman or a man i don’t think there's any need to generalize you know a question like this. : what do you mean by balance their private life and their work? : well i don’t think you can really stop being an artist when you're you know having dinner with your family or taking your kids to school that is one of the i guess one of the joys about it but also one of the a commitments you make there's very little by way of a boundary between your work and your you know personal private whatever life so i think you know it's just a question of honesty if you really put yourself completely forward and you are honest about what you do i think that also somehow blurs the need to separate one of the other and you know i don't think there's really a rule that really applies to this balance as you were asking in the beginning i mean very often people who are great human beings and have a great kindness and that reflects in their family life in this comes across in their work but there are also people who are incredibly conflictive and somehow paradoxically because of that they can also be great as creators so and this is again a no distinction from who they are and what they are in their personas as people  : i have very supportive and loving parents and they just gave me a lot of confidence and sometimes i feel they were a little overprotective one of the reasons going away from [home country] was important for me but i think making me feel that whatever i chose to do was right and was worth pursuing is of course absolutely crucial and that was the way that my parents you know my family made me feel  : i have a brother yes : well yes i mean but creative do they you know practice art no my brother a gallerist he's in the art world it's a very incredibly connected to people and to the creative process he understands very well what artists have to go through and my parents are professionals they are probably less connected in that sense but they are understanding and i mean in a sense i was the one who made the commitment to or just accept it the fact that i was going to devote my life project to being a creator  : that was probably not completely different than other kids you know sport i like playing and music and my life has been very you know very full of music in many ways and also the world that i created with my brother was very important so i was busy also with that you know looking at the world also through his eyes sharing things with him but i would say my upbringing in that sense is not hugely unconventional i was like many other kids  : sorry can you repeat that? : well i have to in terms of time management i have to be much more focused and i think i am i just think i'm a better person and i make better art since they're around  but i could never explain to you  how or why i am able to look back and look at most satisfying let's say successful work i made its been done since they're around if i try to explain how i didn’t find the time to do it i'm not sure i can but i guess it to some extent has to do with as i was saying earlier being a parent is the most difficult and the most rewarding thing that i can think of but also it also puts everything in the right perspective and it makes me give things and circumstances their right value and their right measure so i guess it is probably a form of maturity and i would hope that it is not really something i'm thinking about all the time but i would reflect on the way i work on my approach to my practice  : well they come from what could be referred to as the grammar of everyday life, communication, exchange and exchange can be found in you know economic transactions all that this imply all the social codes that go into them the way that value is assigned to things to experience and also the grammar of every day when it comes to materials and things that surround me you know things that i put in my pocket the things that i pick up or the surfaces that i lie on or my work is a constant reflection basically my passage through life and all its details and complexities and its really that as i said that grammar of every day trying to find meaning and i don’t i'm not really someone who is imagining fantastical scenarios i think all of what i need i can draw from my immediate surrounding and its really my aspiration to find meaning to squeeze and the things that are right around me i don’t need to imagine them being far away or a more complicated than really what's immediately around me  : i have many ideas that are following their course i don’t get to a point where i think okay this is finished now i go onto another one this has to do both with creative processes that its ingrained in my in what drives me but also lets say in a more practical sense because of the fact that i have a career and i have a series of commitments and i am disciplined in recording my ideas in a notebook there are many things that are happened and i consume in and out if focus and certain things and then others and then suddenly i get an invitation this or there or if i suddenly spend a quieter time with not many engagements some of these directions some of these avenues may take a little bit more importance or start ringing with meaning and then i focus on this or that and i also have material lying around i have a studio you know with props and stuff and that’s very often the way that i get into the problems just by tossing them around not necessarily expecting something from them but you know this is very often where things come from sometimes i realize that in order to develop one idea i had to actually drift away in a different direction and start handling material that had nothing to do with that other thing had i not been there i wouldn’t have bounced back to so i just have to keep moving i have to keep active and i have to keep thinking and i very often don’t know when i'm going to feel that certain project or a certain idea is really really worth pursuing and sometimes these connections and these realization happen in moments and places i did not expect so often i but i can tell you that these moments of realization and these moments of yeah of saying okay this is important this is relevant come when i am you know when i touch down on reality when i am not really in my head but i'm more out in the world : yeah of course  :  i get bored and moody and frustrated and it's hard to be an artist : and of course you know i'm not going to complain i do well and what that means is that i don’t have to look for my motivation in a very arid and let's say not promising terrain often if i'm kind of frustrated with one thing i feel that i can turn away from that and look somewhere and i will find something in my life or in my practice or in my surroundings that will get me excited again so i also try to keep my practice open in that sense i want to be able to absorb and to comment on just about anything that comes along i have somehow i feel that the practice of like very traditional practices of like traditional painting let's say traditional figurative sculpture or the more conventional old schools are not really for me because i want to remain open and i want to remain open precisely because i think i would feel i would more often run into a wall or run into a you know dry well if i had practice that was more that was narrower in its forms and narrower in its field of interest  : it’s a good question and its really one of the motors of my practice is somehow bouncing between one and the other never entirely being one end of the spectrum or on the other it’s the tension between reason and intuition that i think drives me. there are things that i don’t want to explain and there are things i really don’t need to explain and things that i feel that i never really try to explain but then there's the rational drive the my interest in ordering principles my interest in seeing patterns seeing acknowledging patterns and following these pattern or bending the patterns you know of course it's in reason that i see these so it's always i guess this space between intuition and reason that keeps driving me i don't think that art has to be always broken down and explained and read like it were a text i think if there's something that really keeps its potential is often something that is not you know not possible to explain its more of a force let's say but i also think that in my drive and in my interest there is this need to also make sense and its reason that wants to make sense to order and wants to as i said establish patterns and understand and its really this pace between the two. : i keep a notebook with a lot of my ideas and i often flip through my notebook and look at notes i made a year ago or 6 months ago and try to feel if there's anything there that on that given day i feel has any relevance and if it does i somehow try to decant that and into a new page and very often there i make connections that make me very glad that i wouldn’t have otherwise and then i think its curious that i didn’t see this 6 months ago because its very clear so part of the way i work is has to do with this reworking and reassessment of things that i have recorded you know in my notes and also in the material that i collect and bring into the studio or the images that i you know clip and put on my walls so it is a constant reassessment and reworking and a lot of zooming in and out sometimes i like to spend you know the whole morning in my studio many times not even doing much and then as soon as i walk out and i walk around the neighborhood that is really when everything clicks so you know as i said i like to keep moving and i feel that you know in being able to manage my own time there is a where i-when i really can aspire to do what i do or to do it well i don’t i mean i can be a disciplined person but i don’t necessarily work best when i have a you know a structure that imposed upon me  : one of the things i try is i try i often try to take the straightest route to boil things down to a simple expression not i mean not to make things complicated in their form in their presentation in their process so... part of my thinking part of my effort goes into trying to sometimes strip down forms to their most essential or circumstances so that they are more direct. : i mean i don’t have a day job but that doesn’t mean that i that art is all of what i do during the day i mean i do a lot of communication also like writing emails i do administration also i have to like you know do my taxes and you know order books online you know like and that sometimes takes the entire day when i look at my watch its like i have to go collect my kids from school and i manage to do 10 minutes of art so it varies it varies a lot and sometimes you know when i'm doing financially well and when i have more help in the studio then you know those people look after all these things and i can just do exactly what i please sometimes i go through periods where i have to do a lot of a lot of that or i have to do a lot of the field work when it comes to finding fabric or material you know that of course you can think of part of the artistic process but there is something that is also mundane about it you know making phone calls and finding the right provider and calling back and etc so you know that often takes a good part of my day  : but i don’t have a day job i don’t have another occupation that i have to go to certain number of hours i can sleep from : how much sorry : i wake up at 7 and i go to bed somewhere around 10 so i sleep 7 hours 7-8 hours  : i'm not really a very nocturnal person i like getting early and getting up early sorry and that doesn’t mean that my hours of you know being most lucid are early in the morning but it makes you feel good to start the day early and even if i reach my best hours later on often if i started the day early it just makes me feel like i you know like it motivates me somehow  : of course : no i mean i wish if i knew i would of course be there more often if i knew had to be more creative but when i look back i guess it's not so hard to see that if i invest a lot of my stamina into a project right after that project i have a little bit of a period of just of withdrawal or just kind of slowing down because you reach a certain climax with making and presenting and etc and very often after that there's a period as i said of slowing down and sometimes it's hard to pick up pace again sometimes my engagements are all packed in you know a couple of months and then the rest of the year it is somehow less structed and i have to rely a lot on my self discipline and if something in my life is exactly the happiest then it's difficult to find some discipline it really has lot to do with what's happening but i find it like it's like you know occupations if i keep i engage then i keep at it and i can generate more of these motivations i'm certainly not sitting around waiting for it to come at me.  : well i think in what i do you get better with age so if you are not completely mistaken and inventing problems which are irrelevant if you follow a path which is right somehow and there's many ways or no way at all to explain what is right but if you follow that path i think you get better with age so you may yes you may sort of improve i don’t exactly remember what was the question but yes i think it come through you know striking becomes more possible after striking back many times : no i'm not someone who is churning out work after work i like to think that that i can say no to some invitations and i only want to devote my time to the ones that are exciting in their novelty or exciting in their prestige or whatnot and its really there i try to invest my creativity not really in the number but more in the specificity sometimes i feel that i'm not someone who does a lot of work outdoors for instance in public space but whenever i'm invited to one of these locations and you know it's something that looks proper than i say yes because i feel that it pushes me a little out of my studio and out of my comfort zone and then i ask myself questions that i wouldn’t otherwise so it's not that i want to make as many of those projects as possible in order to get better but you know occasionally i feel that even in order to make better studio work it helps to suddenly make a big work outdoors in a public place  : because it just enriches experience and i think yeah richness and complexity is something that i would like to be able to condense and invest into my forms.  : what do you mean by revise? : i mean yeah that is a good question because on the one hand i would like to almost out of ethics i would like to feel that i only make the necessary amount of pieces or the right work in order to you know express something and not keep just churning in out because it work out well, on the other hand there are certain things that you have to keep developing because they are modular or because they are you know there's like a formal development or a formal sequencing that you can only get to a good you know partial conclusion by following through so in the way that i practice think there's a little bit of both there are certain moments in the work in which its more like a full stop and then i have to turn sideways and there are others in which its more like a comma and i have to keep moving and then what i can perceive comes only after as you were saying you know some series of alterations or series of revisions um another thing that i heard myself saying in an interview recently also is that often i am involved in an exhibition and as soon as i finish it i have to start thinking of another one because i have another commitment and its very often only in retrospect i am able experience lets say the exhibition the buildup towards an exhibition is often one that you know that there's certain anxiety and certain excitement but then once the exhibitions up the artist becomes like really useless you just have to leave town because once the work is there the work is working for you and there's nothing else for you to do so you know you've sort of put it behind in order to move to something else but then the necessity of looking back and assessing and maybe even reworking what you did it may come shortly after or it may come much later and sometimes that implies reworking certain forms sometimes its just subtle echo but i'm involved in projects frequently i do find myself having to move on form one to the other and only being able to see things in retrospect and else able to see things right as they are happening : yeah i mean when it feels like it ready to just you know it has a life of its own and it hopefully does something in its own right and you’ve just let go  : like i said earlier i try to when it comes to my way of working my process i try to understand what the models for certain project or for a certain form is and i try not to overwork not to do things in 20 steps when i can do it in 3 steps so i think in some ways my method has to do with trying to find a simplicity in that sense  : how do i do it? well i mean memory has its ways, you cannot really you don’t have that much influence i think you can be disciplined about how you record your experience and your forms but they way that these connect you can only hope for but you know it can be something as simple as as i said looking through my notebook or it can be something completely unexpected that just comes after the echo of something on the street so i think you can only hope for that memory has its ways and i think memory is connected to the senses in ways that are exactly you know in your control and sometimes it really defy reason sometimes its smell or sound that triggers and image  : mental tricks no : mental traits um (outward sigh) i don’t think that i should be the one answering that  : well i would hope i'm not distractible i mean there's of course the necessity to be open as i said but open doesn’t mean distractible i think being distracted has to be with has to do more with lacking focus and i would like to be able to open to direct my focus in many directions but still have a rigor and still have a sense of direction so that is crucial part of doing my art is not creating a vision or a system which is limitent limiting and narrowing but yes creating a system that is rigorous and is able to take to anything from anywhere in particular and still kind of channel it in a way that connects with its network i'd say  : yeah i have good memory yes : i can be absentminded for certain things and for certain aspects my spouse is constantly saying that i'm absentminded about commitments and dates and timetables but part of that because i rely on her and she's very very cartesian and very organized in that sense i'm not particularly bad at it but of course we spend a lot of time together so we have to somehow complement one another i have pretty good memory i remember faces and melodies and phone numbers and i have good visual memory as well but probably not the best when it comes to yeah timetables and all that  : i don’t know what you mean by that  : i mean yeah i try not to think in those terms too much because then i could become very self conscious  : but of course i'm aware of the fact that i have to sometimes take a little bit of distance from myself and see and assess what i'm doing or the way that i'm doing it and not totally indulge in something or not get totally obsessed with something because no one else is going to do it for me i have to do it for myself and i think it is important i don’t like seeing it in other people's art that i feel he or she drifted away in a direction is just dull or dumb or wrong and it could have been avoided with just with more self-reflection and being more demanding somehow so i could like to think i can be that for myself  : no : i can be a little compulsive : no my son has adhd so adhd is like is a big subject in my mind and its not one that i think of as the mind so  : yes i mean it's different because i'm in a different place i'm in a different mind frame i'm in a different house and the world is different the world is much more connected  than it was before information travels quicker my voice can be heard in a way that i didn’t imagine could be heard so nothing is the same although i'm the same person and i'm still an artist and this is still what i want to do so it's impossible to answer that  : again i cannot boil down boil that down to one thing i have had several moments of great realization and force and inspiration and i could couldn’t boil it down to one i suppose some artists have had some epiphany that is just a source for the rest of their lives i'm not one of them  : well it is all in the work and i would hope that its spells it out and it's not something that i have to do the work for it you know it's there and that’s something that i would really really hope to always be able to put forward to make things that don’t just touches there but actually do something in their own right so what's most important is basically that all of what we spoken i mean it's all fine but it's really in the work that i would want it to be : your welcome  : its coming up to my bedtime  : thank you  : um, i'm not sure. i don’t know if i can answer that : i built an electric ukulele once/ : /i was pretty proud, because there were no instructions on how to do it, so i kinda  : /just figured it out myself. : uh, well i don’t think i have any usable traits that helped me make it i just had to learn as i made it : yeah it was a lot of repeats and making something and throwing it away and making- trying to make it better-and took a while. : i was learning the ukulele at the time. i just- i know i know that like some places sell electric ukuleles, but it is very rare and i wanted my own, so just i decided to make one.  : obstacles...hmmm, i kinda feel like i had a pretty easy life to be honest. -laughs-... yeah, i don’t- i don't know.  i don’t think i had many obstacles and i also don’t think much about the past so it's hard to remember any obstacles. : yeah yeah. i'm always thinking about the future and i almost never think about the past. so its hard to answer questions about myself. : yeah : i think my poor memory has to do with it.  like its hard for me to remember people and things that have happened.  and even things i have made its very hard for me to remember what i've done and when and uhh yeah... i don’t know its harder to answer those questions.   : uh, that i've made? : uhhh, i don’t, i cant, i don’t, i don't i cant uhh really think of anything.  um, i mean i feel like every project has given me more opportunities and has, has helped me uh expand my skills but i can't think of any one project that was so pivotal that changed : yeah, i've always wanted to make some stuff. : and like drawing and doing artsy stuff when i was a kid.   : i would say if someone is really interested in something and they have a lot of free time to work at it, they’ll be good at it. there's no question about it. um if you're not interested in something i don’t think you should pursue it because you're not going to be good at it.   : yeah i feel like there's definitely people that have natural talent, um but just being interested and obsessed about something can really carry you far. i think for me its just, i get really interested in things and um, sometimes its hard to do other things and because of that, it’s a good way to create something.   : um, no i think it depends on the person/ : /its whatever fields you are...for me i don’t really socialize much and then its just because it makes me feel better to not talk to that many people.  and i think other people who are really are social, uh social people, they thrive on other people and it helps them create things.  i think it just depends on the person. : yeah, its definitely important.  : definitely for me, um the professors i had in college and the things my peers were interested in in college really helped set my own direction : uh, yeah.  in college i had a lot of professors that introduced me to types of like design art that inspired me that i hadn't seen before. i think that as a child you know we're more interested in  things we see in tv and movies.  so just to be exposed to things that are- uncommon or - its just, for me it inspired me to take my work in other places. : oh uh, i think the good teachers are the ones that expose their students to many things and when the student latches on to something that's interesting the professor is just really good at supporting the student. : uhh well, for me i - so when i was a - before college i was really into visual design and animation but i think college introduced me to like uh computers and programming and how machines can help you create a car and also exposed me to new ways of thinking from people in history and you know just never read about pre-college.   : yeah, in uh in definitely in college umm just the things that people were working on. like uh, you'll see them working on their own personal project and i would be really impressed by something and it would make me want to do similar uh similar projects to them.  i think today i have a lot of peers that are in - who have very different skill sets and that also has inspired me to not be so focused on certain certain projects, like to try other things. : umm, it depends. uh usually if i see people who are working on things that are- that interests me personally i do like helping them and i do like to tell them what i know about that topic but uh i don't try to force myself on everybody. : well i think that for me i like to tell uh tell people oh for instance, if somebody's working on a project that i have some kind of knowledge in, i just like to share what i already know about it. : yeah : uh i think it depends on the person.  : i definitely think that leading ideas is uh more important.  just like being able – the – being able to think of new ideas or combine previous ideas into new things is really important for everybody.  and even if you're working on a team it helps um whosevers leading it to have different options. : um... for me, i definitely live my personal life differently from how i approach work.  i'm a lot much easier going when it comes to uh personal life.  i'm very lazy in my personal life.  but i'm the opposite when i'm working i'm very focused and i work very hard.  : are you talking as someone whose interested in the field or? : oh umm i don’t know, i don’t know how to judge importance.  i'm just in it more for selfish reasons.  i just enjoy doing what i'm doing. : yeah i think yeah i think overall i'm more selfish than others.  : i think other people have- want to do something that’s important in the world or want to help others.  i kinda just want to make things because i- i like doing it and it just kills the time. i'm not interested in helping people. -laughs- : yeah for... i was - i would say i was more passionate before i started working for other people.  sometimes you have to take directions that are... or you have to work with other people which can just be demotivating. : i just switch to personal projects when i can.   : so, if lets say i work and there's something i don’t really enjoy doing or if i'm getting tired with a specific project, i will just spend more time on my personal projects. : yeah i think so : i think their interest in the topic.  you can really tell when someone is really interested by how much they read books and how, how many side projects they work on independently. : yeah people who are really into researching and just like creating things on their own is a pretty big indicator. : well, general follow through of assignments.  being able to finish something.   : not particularly. umm i would for - i would say sometimes they have different uh - they seem to have different interests, like they bring different perspectives.   : i do notice that guys seem more interested in- in like programmatic design. things that require a lot of tools or might require like programming might be interested. like but i don’t know if i can generalize it.  like that just happens to be the people that i've met. : yeah they're more interested in visuals and like motion and spatial things or... yeah it might just be the people i know. : um... i don’t know.  i feel like everybody's all so different in that regard.  if people enjoy overworking –laughs- they should do that.  i don’t think i should tell them not to do that.  but definitely if you don’t like doing your work so much you shouldn't do it. -laughs- you should spend more time you know living life. : umm well, my family is really different, so...uh i don't think they really...-end of recording 1/start of recording 2 -they... maybe they made me more confused -laughs-  like thinking for my family i don’t know anyone that like works in design or... so for them it doesn’t seem like a job.  so for me, growing up, i probably didn’t think too much of it as a job until later in life.   : yeah its more of a hobby. : and in my - they're, they're probably thinking that i'd become something like an architect or something like that. which confused me because i have no interest in those things.-both laugh- : i think they were pretty good.  i can't complain.  they definitely - i would say they pushed me towards different things but its not like they told me not to do what i wanted to do.   : uh, probably doing design related things. : yeah : yeah uh yeah, i pretty much do everything alone.  even now its, i-end of recording 2/ start of recording 3 - : i have two sisters : older sisters. : no, they're –laughs- anti-creative. : ones a doctor and ones an accountant. : uh they're just real estate agents.  they're retired now. : probably from reading books or just uh... yeah just reading books and a lot of research. : usually its umm, my process is just... i guess i'm a big - also a big consumer of media so i like to read books and watch movies and watch tv shows and play games.  and i don’t know its just uh like when i'm doing those things ideas just come.  it's not like i -  i don’t really seek out ideas. i usually have not enough time to execute my ideas so usually its about filtering all the ideas then it is about finding new ones. : i, i, so there's a lot of ideas i know i can't execute at the present moment just because of my lack of skills, so i do think a lot about what i can accomplish or what i can learn to be able to do something and it really does whittle down how many the things i can do and from there i just pick what's most interesting at the time. : yeah, that's kind of a hard question.  usually i can tell if somethings going to be fun to work on.  so even if i have ideas that i think are good and i don’t think they’ll be fun to work on i wont work on them and ill just pick something that is like a pleasant thing to work on.   : yeah.  for me, its all about just...trying to find a project that i'm going to enjoy. : uh both are very important.  i think in design there's a lot of rational thinking involved.  it requires a lot of like uh – requires a lot of logic and systematic thinking as opposed to more art things which don’t necessarily have to use those things.  so, for me, i'm very - i think i'm very rational and logical and i bring a lot of that to my projects.   : yeah, well i feel like its important to try different directions and pick the best one.  so, hunches are good, but i always like to test them and also explore other options before i settle on something. : mhm : uh, i would - it depends on how big that problem is but everything i do i probably iterate, probably at least like five times um even like the small, small things.  i think its rare to find something that uh that works best on the first try. : yeah, i do. sometimes i have to stop myself  –laughs-otherwise i wouldn’t finish anything. : um, i don’t think there's really a way to know but there's always another problem that’s more interesting to solve so at some point i'll just get tired with the current problem, so it helps me uh move forward. : right, right.  sometimes ill go back to it.  but, i think it goes back to being interested in what you're doing.  if you lose interest in the iterations you might as well stop because you're not going to find a better solution. : oh yeah, all the time. : yeah i do -laughs-.   : yeah : i think that’s very important.   : definitely. i feel like half of the good ideas come from not trying to think about it -laughs-.   : uh maybe 7 or 8 hours of sleep. : late at night.  um especially when i was younger i would stay up very late and i definitely felt like i was more creative and productive after midnight. but since i've gotten older i've tried to stop doing that.-both giggle- : yeah, i think its healthier/ : /to be normal -laughs-. : yeah, i do a lot of sketching and notetaking :  uh no, sometimes i'll have it all in my head but its when - its about my bad memory. if i feel like i'm going to forget something i can't – it really bothers me until i write it down because i know i'm going to forget. : sure. so if i have a good general idea i'll start thinking a lot about it in my head and it will be hard to stop thinking about it.  and at some point i'll have enough ideas where i know that if i don’t put things down on paper i'm gonna forget something. so i start sketching ideas and writing notes and at some point i'll just have so many ideas that it will be hard not to start a project and that’s usually when i actually start making things and iterating on ideas. um you know just-from there, its just kind of that process over and over except i'm just doing it for specific parts of the project. : yeah, yeah. : yeah, i think so.  there's a lot of back and fourth between my sketches and my notes.   : i do/ : / but - i do, i do. : yeah, i do -laughs-. : yeah, i think like everybody that i work with knows that i only work by myself.  -laughs- there's definitely things that i can't do by myself. and projects, if you have a good team, i do think greater than the sums of the people. : uh it depends, i either - i like either leading the team or being someone who - like someone whose a follower of whoever is leading and taking directions really well.  i don’t - yeah i like to be on those extremes. : yeah, they require - so leading i like because i like to think about - i like, i like the, i like thinking about concepts and project direction and like assigning tasks to people and i like to think about all those things.  but i also like to just make things and be given instructions on what to do and not having to think about that sometimes.  i don’t like to be in the middle where there's some projects where people have ideas but they're not really leading and they confuse people.  i don’t really like that/  : /i like the separation. : yeah right.  and that’s one of the reasons why i don’t really like working with other people because other people like to be in the middle sometimes : and it really bothers me when people are in the middle. : eh it makes a project confusing. it makes it - it can really derail uh someone's vision.  i like to follow - if i were on the other spectrum where i'm following someone else's direction even if i don’t agree with it i believe that people with strong visions should carry out their vision because um sometimes they have like ideas or direction that is beyond what i'm thinking just because i'm - because people are just different. -laughs- and i don’t like having people that confuse project directions. : yeah, i either - if i want to lead a team i would come up with a project idea and i will pitch it to people, i will recruit others to work on it.  if i want to be a follower i usually see what people are working on and if its interesting ill volunteer and ill make sure not to - ill make sure not to... uh step on peoples toes if i'm a follower.  : yeah, all the time.   : uh i guess for me its always been...hmm, i guess it’s a combination of many things. sometimes its just lack of energy and also frustration and uh and really stopping from thinking of new ideas if something just feels very difficult to accomplish.  um sometimes its technical- technical hurdles and, and i always have a hard time asking for help and i also have a hard time… um there's somethings like i'm not good at speaking so –laughs- its hard for me to form good questions to find the right answers.  so sometimes i have problems i just know that’s just really hard for me to communicate to other people and ill just like get stuck and that'll kind of end up being the thing that stops me from having drive i guess.   : i usually either just take a break for a minute and work on something else.   : uh, i guess i kind of mix the two.  so i, i like, i like watching tv and watching movies while i work. : yeah, i do.   : yeah, if you watched me work you would think that i'm not working –laughs- because i'm just like hanging out and watching tv or playing with my pets.  it doesn’t look like work.  : no. : i mean i'm sometimes forced to walk the dog or have to do certain things so - . : yeah, i have a dog and a cat.  i hang out with my girlfriend. -laughs-  umm yeah i don’t know. i uh i don't know. i kinda feel like i'm always - i'm not really ever really working.  i work from home too so, which is different from everyone else on my team.  so for me, it just kinda, its hard to separate work from uh real life i guess.  i mean i'll wash the dishes while i'm doing work or i'm like thinking about something or you know cleaning is the same.  : yeah, i guess, yeah i am.  : mhm. yeah.  : yeah, i think so.  um, i always am generating ideas when i'm doing other things and i also - also get inspired by different things you know when i'm talking with my girlfriend because she does something very different... yeah. : yeah, its definitely a unique dynamic i think - i feel like pretty lucky that they let me work from home. : yeah – both laugh- i've never been really good at uh being with a lot of people. : i'm defiantly more productive when i'm by myself.  i feel like every - anybody would be more productive if they work by themselves.  but i don’t know.  it is harder to communicate with others. but, it works out fine. : okay sure : yeah, that sounds right. : uh. not really, uh i mean i work with a lot of project managers who deal with that. : yeah, but i'm actually very good with timing.  i think i'm exceptional compared to other people in my field.  : yeah. others, they tend to have a really hard time meeting deadlines.  but, i'm -  like for me, its hard to stop on, like a problem, until i find a solution and even after the solution i like to iterate and i usually do that way before a deadline. and for other people its hard for them to meet deadlines. : i think i'm more driven by iterations while others are more driven by uh like solving a problem the right way the first time or trying to figure it all out at once.  i'm more just ill do it very quickly to see if something works, if it doesn’t ill just throw it away.  i guess i'm not as precious with my work, either, so i don’t care if something i make isn't used or if i have to remake something.  i kinda just enjoy the process of work.  that’s why its hard for me to think of stuff i've done i just don’t think about it that much. : umm, its hard to say, i don’t think i know other people well enough to say.  definitely, i, i feel like the best people in the field produce so much work i don’t know how they do it, and i guess the more famous you are the more people who work for you so you can accomplish more but just some people i just don’t understand how they can do so much. i definitely also feel the opposite where i cant believe people do so little - both laugh-. : uhh hm. i mean i have a very poor memory.  but when something really interests me it definitely sticks in my memory, so uh things that - that jump out at me tend to stick around a long time and i guess in a way because it sticks around it helps me make connections to other things that also interest me.  but for the most part, its hard for me to remember details and little things.   : yeah, i definitely have to translate a lot of it to paper.  yeah, i have a lot of notes and use a lot of uh- again computers that have a bug tracking software so you could create a new, if you have a bug you could issue and you could open it or close it or fix it and write notes for it.  i do a lot of that, but for ideas. : yeah. : i think so because usually bug tracking is for engineering.  i think i do that because i do both.  i do the art and i also engineer.  i also am like, which is also a little rare in my field.  so i mix the two a lot.   : so just tracking ideas is one of those things that carries over. : maybe sometimes, i'm not too sure.  i think it definitely - i definitely am more um i guess pragmatic with my ideas compared with some people. um some people have really wild ideas that i know you can't execute at least you know reasonably.  so for me, i -  when i have wild ideas- i put them - i put them, file it away i don’t pursue it because i know it will be a waste of time. : i think i'm very very focused.   : i don’t think so. i don’t really - i don’t talk to enough people to know -laughs-.  : i don’t think so. i yeah.. yeah i don't think so. : i think the balance of both.  usually when your brains stirring you want to be uninhibited. um but once you pick a topic, it’s like a good time to start thinking about what is possible and having pragmatic solutions.  and i think after that its good to be a good critic of your work. so i think its just a funnel. : yeah, i think just idea wise, its hard to inhibit yourself from thinking of ideas.  i have pretty crazy ideas all the time.  but when it – when i'm starting a project i start becoming- i do restrain myself and – and i also feel like there's a lot of creativity that comes out of restraining. just like uh sometimes projects fail because its just so open ended and its hard to have a good vision for something when anything goes.   : sometimes, yeah. : yeah, not all of the time. : i guess like both.  : sometimes i'll do a lot of research on certain things but other things ill just yeah do it without thinking and it doesn’t really make sense sometimes but it's just i can't explain it.  even like buying things, sometimes at the grocery store i'll like look at - calculate how much price per ounce.  i don’t know why i'm really picky and cheap at the grocery store.  but if i'm buying something really expensive at home i just press buy i don't think about it.  i don’t know if its just the grocery store setting or certain things with me really make me that way and i can't explain it.   :  um it depends on what it is. there's definitely - uh like when i'm doing design work there's certain things that really bother me, like if somethings off and i'll always be checking things that i know other people don't care about so i guess i do have some compulsiveness, but not - not for everything. : no, i don’t think so.   :   um hm... i guess in the beginning a lot of it i feel like was, there was a lot uncertainty.  when i was younger when i started projects, i felt like everything was an experiment.  i guess uh now i feel like i've done things many times or tried many different options, its less an experiment and more trying to find uh... trying to find just things that i haven't experimented with yet and its kind of hard sometimes because uh because – i don’t know how to explain it. -laughs- i guess... um i guess now a lot of the- sometimes i seek things that i haven't done before and its harder now to do that because i feel like i've done most of the things. i don't know if that makes sense. yeah, i don’t know how to explain it. : yeah. yeah. so, a lot of the challenge i was just finding things that will interest me, which is more difficult to do now then it was when i was younger when everything seemed new. : oh yeah, i mean i'm pretty embarrassed with all the stuff i've done.  its hard for me to look at anything that i work on. yeah.  : yeah, i don't want to look at it. i don’t like it when people at work bring up old projects. i don't really like to think about what i've made. i see mistakes in previous projects. : uh i don’t have the urge to fix things i have more like an urge to not want to talk about – like not want to think about it.  which is easy for me to do, i just don’t think about it.  but if someone brings up something that i've made long ago it kind of makes me cringe.   : um... i don’t know. -laughs- i guess not.   : … hmm, do people - other people have good answers to this question? -both laugh-  :  uh sometimes i think something that helps me is when i try to think of ideas for somebody else's project for them.  so my girlfriend is a scientist and she always has these uh science uh questions and issues that she's trying to think through herself and i'll try to brainstorm for her and i find that it makes me more creative on my own projects, just like trying to think - think for someone else. : yes.  : that's great you can pronounce his name. : i know of his son, he's a media art person  : oh my god. : mhm.  : oh my goodness, uhh what am i the most proud of, uh overcoming shyness.  : shyness. : more or less. : pardon me? : uhh just facing it, facing the fear. : gradually.  : mm yeah i'm extremely determined. : um... i'm, um, i think i don’t have any frontal lobe so i'm pretty fearless –interviewer laughs- i mean oddly some other part of my brain makes me shy while the frontal lobe, you know, makes me do crazy things.  : -laughs- i don’t know you guys would know more on my scan : hmm, can it be something i haven't overcome? : uh... weight gain. : hmm.... yeah, i think so.  : a class i took? : a class i took, yeah there's a class i took at [university 1] in the 80s called, uh, expanded cinema or video art –– it was called video art.  : so he showed structuralist films, experimental films, and some of the first computer animation. and the experimental films involved, um, showing film in architecture and, you know, the animation, you know, was some of the first tests that artists were you know, using, you know using computer so that just, you know i had a (inaudible, 3:17) experience from that one.  : mm um, i think it just, i'd never seen anything like it and it seemed very exciting to me and i just figured i got to do it this -both laugh- huh. : well i'm still doing it –interviewer laughs- i still have the same fascination.  : i haven't had my buddhist monk experience since then.  : but i do get that sort of opiate feelings you get when your artwork is working so occasionally you get that. : so when you get a you know, you get an idea that you know is –it- then you feel this sort of rush and it’s the very pleasant...  and i imagine it's like an endorphin-ish thing but i, you know, i ain't no scientist so i couldn’t tell ya. : um no, because it's not that frequent. : hmm. probably it's, i mean it's probably lots of different things. uh, probably acceptance you know uh... it's probably the psychological thing. since i had horrible parents you know like reaching out, i mean the world is just as horrible p –– you know, they're horrible parents as well, but i do seem to get a lot of support anyways from that from that so yeah. looking for support.  : my, your questions are all over the place.  : i always tell people you should do want you want, you have one life... : you don’t want to be miserable in your 40s. : mm, i had to gradually come to that nobody told me that that could happen... but i –– you know, i had some people kind of people along the way you know a little here and there. : um, if you have supportive colleagues then yeah, that’s great, that’s really important... um, you should try to you know, as the doctor you quoted dr. shushushu (gibberish) -interviewer laughs- you know keeping it positive, um that's not quoting him really –– no sticking with positive influences and supportive people is really important...  and creating that environment around you is really important –– i've found that in teaching especially...  so yeah, find –– i mean it doesn’t always work that way, but like most of my art dealers are pretty supportive except for one –laughs- but i think that’s from insecurity. : it may be trying to rationalize -interviewer laughs- the behaviors help a little bit, you know rationalize or compartmentalize the crazy people in your life, put them into a box, yeah.  : in the middle. -interviewer laughs- i'd say early you should be looking for it and looking for things you like and noticing out trying to figure why you like them, why you are attracted to them and that will help you in your decision for, you know, later on. um, coming to something late you know why not, i think if it –– i mean i don’t do this, it seems ideal to me to actually switch careers totally... 'cause you really only have one life, why would you know spend it all on one career or one interest : i don’t seem to be able to get out of that, i tried\ : \i gave a good effort i –– oh well, maybe i'll still do it.  : um yeah, yeah, it wasn’t like i mean...  i like making art, i like what i'm doing, so i think that’s why i couldn’t stop. : and you know the outside world just keeps pushing me on as well i mean i kind of don’t have a choice in a way, i mean i guess i could just completely stop, i mean some artists do... but yeah something keeps me going. yeah i wish i had more time than for sure i'd do another career. -interviewer laughs- maybe if i hired people i could, you know, have –– i kind of need more money to be able to hire people to do you know my other interests, so i think that could work, so maybe i should put that out there and maybe it'll come together.  : um, i want to produce science fiction television or movies : um, especially people like octavia butler for example. : um, so more from a feminist point of view, that you know i think is a little bit lacking –– it's getting better actually... so there's that. i'd like to design glasses –– eyeglasses. : i'd like to build a house... um i'd like to start an internet, well two internet things: one is cell phones for old people that have their own operating system that’s really simple to use and then um, also i'd like to have a complaint like blog that you know kind of straightens up the world a little bit, like warns people about ebay and things like that all the kind of pitfalls you run into\ : \so do it in a, in a smart way that's probably already been done i've logged into some of those complaint sites and seems like they're just capturing your data more\ : \than doing anything. : …i don’t know what you mean, leading ideas : um, i think : um... : you mean in art? : i think, i mean art is so vast i think you can enter any sort of way you want so i wouldn’t...  you know i think it's an individual choice. um... if you're top of the field i just think of one of my teachers who was famous sort of ,[teacher 1], he killed himself because he was so disappointed with the top of the field.  : at least that’s speculation. um...  : i think you can't help it... uh, no i think you need to have your personal values in everything you do... yeah, if you can.  : i'm really an idealist i think –interviewer laughs-  : yeah i would love the world to be you know completely socialized but i understand how that doesn’t exactly work but you know there should be a goal. : but you also need to have desire, and you know people want you know people need to want need to be able to want to do things you know and make things and uh yeah. so, it's like a conflict when you have a socialized, completely socialized world because people are kinda lazy i think.  : i just sounded like a republican, that’s really weird –interviewer laughs, both laugh- but i still want it –more laughter- i want, i –– i don’t know i'm not a social scientist so i have no idea how to even, how you would even start to do that... yeah.  : um, it just : they're just desires i have that are, you know\  : \that i just don’t have time you know to pursue. yeah, okay, if i was a billionaire what are the things i would do? i would certainly finance medicine and education and the arts and... i'd build really interesting buildings, -laughs- goodness, probably um all kinds of things but it would all take up your time so much too you know.  : um, if you’ve ever been to parts of the world that don’t have very much art you can really get it quickly. : it's like quang zhou in korea, south korea, or like iowa mayb –– well maybe not iowa, 'cause... but like places that are so ugly and so, there's just nothing interesting about them. it's really sad, and it feels like the people are sad. i've been looking at assisted living for my parents\ : \and a lot of those places have that, that same kind of sadness that lack of you know, i think um, art gives you like a kind of life to a place. : yeah.  : hmm, it must be pretty constant, as even with you know i grew up in minnesota and it's so boring there 'cause you're trapped inside most of the year because it's so cold so you know you end up making things and i think... that just you know it does take you out of the this you know it adds to whatever it is you're experiencing. : oh god -interviewer laughs- that’s sort of fifty-fifty because there's a lot of tedious work you have to do when you make art or sell it. if you sell it there's a whole lot of tedious work you have to do...  it's very annoying.  : very yeah, very yeah. : mm, um well in high school i kept taking um you know night school classes and things in art... um and i went to you know art college when i was 19 so... pretty earl –– i mean it's just always there. i mean i started out trying to be a graphic designer. : because its practical but it's actually not very practical to be a graphic designer... they don’t get paid very much. : in art school all my friends were artists and um i kept taking um painting classes and things so i actually like screwed up my curriculum i wasn’t going to graduate so i actually dropped out.  : but you got to –– you know i guess i knew then you have to do what you want but\ : yeah –laughs- but...   : mm mm. : well this summer i had to deal with my parents\ : \so i kind of slowed down the art. : maybe. : i don’t know i um, i pretty much always have some kind of obligation i have to make art for. so i don’t really have a choice. : it's just like one after another. i mean i guess i could say no –laughs- but a lot of them are too interesting to pass up so.  : mhm. : yep that’s how it's always been for me.  : yeah in fact i can't go to somebody and say i'd like to do this that doesn’t work for me people always have to come to me\ : \and i've always had enough you know plenty. : um, the first installation um [company 1] they asked um god maybe even the first... god that could have been even like that easy tv was kind of the... yeah hmm... i guess i did an open call in new york but that sort of doesn’t count 'cause you just bring a film and then show it uh... i think [company 2] they sort of invited me to do something and then i figured out what i was going to do. and then bliss house and then [museum 1] and that was like 88 or something... 87 or 88 –– i don’t know maybe i'm getting the dates all wrong, probably getting the dates all wrong maybe it was 90 –interviewer laughs- 91 or 92, hm better check no that was grad school okay so it was like 87. yeah no it's always been that way.  : hmm, i think kind of finding myself um thinking about installation art i think it's a. you know, somebody has a place and they want you to do an installation in that place. so i think that’s how it happens. i mean i, i, every time i try to propose an installation for a place it doesn’t work. i mean i haven't tried that much. i tried early on. : but yeah no it's, you know when somebody wants you it's the, the whatever, the power relationship works out better.  : yeah. : no it's one of my words of wisdom i give to young artists is go to art openings. : and seeing (inaudible) meeting people that creates you know this network i mean maybe now with facebook and everything it's maybe, it's a different kind of network you create. same idea i suppose. : ah... let me think, well maybe the first person who taught the video art class, [teacher 2] probably, yeah. he sort of set me off on this. um... earlier than that my color teacher [teacher 3] in college, in undergrad and earlier than that first grade [teacher 4] said i made the best trees –both laugh- i dedicated a piece to her it's really cute. : yeah.  : well [teacher 4]  was supportive and singled me out you know from the whole class and i must've probably, i probably never felt that before i imagine... yeah i have crazy parents they don't know how to be supportive... let's see, i forgot the question : mm okay, well yeah being supportive. i don’t know if [teacher 2] was supportive necessarily but um he was interesting. : yeah i wouldn’t say he was supportive. : you know it was a course and he showed\ : \a lot of different work you know just um, but i'd never seen, i had never seen structuralist cinema and i had never seen you know computer animation. also the same time there was a show at [museum 2] installation art and that blew my mind too.  : i mean you could physically experience work with your body and that’s something i, i try to achieve as well. : mhm. : yeah. : pretty much yeah. : oh yeah, definitely. : mm, well i think they should try to find themselves, um whatever that can mean and i always try to support whatever that is, you know, and it's usually never anything like what i do or i'm interested in and i think that’s really important. : um, well sometimes i find myself taking something they’ve said and then almost like repeat back to them in a sort of associative way and it gives them kind of like a poetic link to what they were already thinking about. so it seems to work... and it gets them to think a little deeper about what they were saying as well, so yeah. : um, sometimes yes.  : yeah. : mm, um they work hard, they have good ideas, um they're unassuming, um they're not like assholes –both laugh- the ones that are assholes\ : \probably do well too but i don’t i just you know i, i compartmentalize those ones and i don’t care about them -interviewer laughs- i mean it's my world view. -both laugh- : mm, well some, some people are definitely more creative than others hm, uhhh gosh that’s a hard one to answer 'cause everybody's kind of different. hmm... i always wish people were even more creative than they are... so probably uh doesn’t enter into it in my assessment of success as much i mean that you know you have to have a certain amount.  : yeah. : but i'm never, i'm never so you know somebody who is really creative is going to surprise me, you know, and i never feel that surprised. i'll feel really well, i'll feel like somebody has good ideas and they're interesting and you know well executed and you know, but i guess seem to want it to push farther probably you know in assessing myself same thing yeah... kinda infinite. : um, public opinion. : understanding... you know peop –– it's like van gogh you know people didn’t get it for a long time and now it's so obvious.  : mhm. : yeah. : um, well it's probably you know that's probably something you don’t really need to have i just, it's something i appreciate\ : \in somebody. um, i've just seen some people go really far, with a sort of gracious attitude, um yeah. : yeah. : men have this ridiculous confidence –both laugh- yep.  : gee, it's how we're raised, and you know in the same term, i mean generally then women get to have this lack of confidence. that’s sort of the unassuming thing too but\ : yeah, so you know so you just have to like factor that in to the equation and you know um take away the benefit of the doubt from men and give it to women a little bit\ : \you know even it out and that seems to work pretty well.  : sure yeah\ : teaching or whatever, yeah. yeah, well there's one instance i had a curator over at my house and two former students came over to show their work to her and the male student was so utterly confident and his work was very strong and you know was sort of like perfected and the woman who presented was uh not very confident and a little bit shy but her work was very good as well, and it was, it was sort of frustrating to watch her struggling. : so it's annoying.  : the crap we have, it's just, you know, maybe someday that just won't be an issue and that you know i'm not it's certainly –– there's a lot of men who aren't confident and lot of women who are. : yeah the con –– too, too much confidence does seem to be like, um, if something else is going on, you know, ego issues or something. : in oh, in the sexes? : uh let's see... hmm... well if i take those, that pair again and think about them because it's kinda easier to generalize the whole world with these two people. -both laugh- um, his ideas: very strong but also almost conventional? you know like clever. : and her ideas were uh... more like in process and uh not as well formed and probably had more potential in the long run. : but you might –– you know if you saw the presentation he would win. : yeah, yeah 'cause of the confidence and all that and the cleverness. so it's like a public opinion sort of thing and you're gonna look, you know, you're not going to see the nuance of the situation because of all that confidence and cleverness, yeah. : so yeah. but i –– you know, just have to keep at it.  : yeah. : hmm. gosh, i don’t know... hmm. i mean i'm not sure i understand the question. : oh like having kids or something.  : yeah i don’t know. oh my god. i don’t think i have the answer for that, i never raised a family. i've taken care of my stupid family.  : um, i don’t know it seems like all my time is absorbed in, you know in this art making thing and maybe that’s a mistake i don’t know it's too late now –both laugh- i don’t know i think people f –– you know, people –– you figure out what's important to you, you know find a way to do it. : and maybe it's not fair to children though, to be raised by an artist. i have a feeling it's probably true... but –laughs- it's not going to stop you. i mean yeah there should be a law –both laugh-  : most parents, you know probably most parents shouldn’t be raising children anyway so. -deep breath- : well it gave me um a lot of determination, and the ability to do things that you know uh, the ability to do anything that i thought i –– you know, i just think i can do anything. 'cause uh my parents didn’t raise me. : so you know i, early on i just i realized that i had, you know, had to figure out how to do things and do it. : no. : yeah, well there's five children, i'm the oldest. : and we're all completely different, and um starting in maybe sixth grade i was cooking all the meals\ : \and taking care of everything, and, and then you know my next brother, he uh same thing uh... it's interesting that my brother has a certain genius for knowing how to do things. : you know and i think we both just you know had to have that in order to survive uh... yeah. so yeah it just gave me this certain –– a lot of desire to fix the world –laughs- and um, a lot of you know, ability to –– i mean i think artists have to be able to take on whatever it is they're interested in doing and just you know sort of make it up as you go and figure it out and you do it. so yeah –laughs-  : mhm. um, well i think i had a lot of free time. : mhm. i think i watched a lot of tv –both laugh- i made a lot of things. oh, yeah we just cleaned out my parents' house, i threw out all the stuff i made it's crazy. i cooked a lot, yeah, i mean i just yeah just a lot of time in the day. : when you're a kid. : um i think my mother is but she never had the confidence. : um, siblings creative, my one brother maybe could um, he has either bipolar or someth –– no schizophrenia, maybe both yeah. he has a hard time. : he's amazing, he's like a genius for science, never had to study he would just straight a's. it's so sad, because you know he could have taken that ability, and gone with it but, yeah, schizophrenia doesn’t help.  : so my mom is um, uh add and my dad is adhd. : and it's sort of funny they found each other.   : uh, shyness come from mean parents. : shutting you down, me down i guess, and the determination uh comes from having so much to, you know so many responsibilities as the oldest child.  : oh sure, yeah, in art school, yeah my friends certainly.  : oh well i guess, you know i got to see how they made art you know, got to uh i suppose um try to understand you know, how they thought about it and you know what decisions they made and that kind of thing. : goodness. uh, sometimes i just have an idea and then that’s it –– it's so great what that just sort of happens. um... uh sometimes it's for a particular project, something about the place and then i you know let that sort of formulate into the idea –– you have um, you have to know that it's going to work and then you just let it, you know, you keep working you keep doing it and it always does… so yeah if you think it's not going to work –laughs- that’s not going to work out. so you have to i guess have a sort of positive attitude about it.   : yep, yep. : um, well, it’s the deadline. : huh yep. -sighs-   : um, hmm could flip a coin –interviewer laughs- if i can't make up my mind i uh, i'll flip a coin\ : \and then if it and then you know, so if it if it lands on one solution, you kind of know "oh, that’s not really what i wanted" and it helps you und –– you know helps you realize that, which decision you actually do want to pursue  : so yeah sometimes i do that. : and you know you sort of feel it in your gut oh no that was really what i wanted. -interviewer laughs- : um, well i'll do well for example i guess huh um i'm working on a project for [university 2] um it’s a stem cell research [university department 1] i don’t know if i got the name of it right, [university department 1] name they do stem cell research um and they want me to make them an art piece so i'm just starting to research stem cells and thinking about it and thinking of regenerative, you know what does that mean what can i –– but it's kind of odd because like i don’t want to looks like you know microscopic movies that they already have, although those are really intriguing and beautiful so it's, it's really um a tricky one. so you know i just start researching and kind of looking for associations and um things that click and you know that kind of happens. : i think a lot of it kind of um is happening in the back of your mind you know, and then, and then when you know it clicks it just sort of coming to the f –– you know, foreground and you notice, and i think noticing is just a part of decision making. : you know and there's sort of fast you know –– uh oh my phones doing something –– there's you know fast thinking or um adaptive unconscious kind of thinking where you just know, you know it's, and i think artists actually um mm what's the word –– cultivate that kind of thinking because you're constantly making decisions as you're even like drawing, where your pencil goes you're constantly making a decision over and over and over hundreds of thousands of times and so i think you develop your intuitive or adaptive unconscious uh fast thinking kind of thing.  : they're both important. : 'cause it's um –– 'cause you end up you know, you're communicating. maybe that’s, they're both linked anyways.  : yeah intuition to me is decision making and knowing and rationality what is that, it feels like communicating and you know, to other people, and maybe having the empathy to understand what other people are going to see in your work. : yeah. because i think if you don’t, if you're not able to see that or you know edit your own work when it's not communicating i think you get a little lost. : yeah it's easy to get lost. i'm looking at whole bunch of applicants for our department you know we have a position open and, oh my god, ah it’s a quagmire of people who don’t know how to communicate. -both laugh- : all the, kind of constantly\ : um, because technology is constantly changing, so i'm like i re-rendered every single piece i could. : maybe in 2015, yeah.  : that sort of stops you from making work you know it's just it's like retooling it all, it's kind of ridiculous –interviewer laughs- then it's also re-rendering at higher resolution but the whole color space shifted all like you know when we went to flat screen monitors? : i think everything shifted. : i mean i haven't really researched it i've just been sort of the, the victim of it you know just to recalibrate everything. : yeah.  : yeah.  : yeah. : and actually i think it improved it as well for, so it's um more adaptable in the future.   : yeah. because if you have an image let's say you have an image like a photograph and it's blown out its too bright you can't rescue that you can't adjust the color um because it's gone. : but if you have a col –– if you have a photograph that’s too dark, you can adjust it and you can bring it up to brighter, and you can have a pretty good photograph. so, by re-rendering everything in the sort of darker spectrum um i'm able –– i think i've made my art like have more longevity. : for future technologies.  : yeah it's technical. : mhm. : mhm. : i make animations. : let's see for this piece i just finished called [name of piece 1] i researched dutch still lifes mostly, and kind of just took out some of the fruits and things from those images and i sort of make like a rough collage. : just to kind of get a feel for what –– and i've actually never worked that way before, but it seemed to be a good idea, gave me sort of um a um... a destination. : but otherwise i make like quick animation tests\ : \and if i like kind of that things that are happening –– like i did one yesterday for the stem cell and it, yeah it's kind of interesting, it had some potential.  : it takes, hmm at least fifty.  : yeah. maybe more, yeah it’s annoying. takes a lot.   : alone. : i have an assistant once a week.  : um i just, um, well last week she repaired computers. uh, yesterday, can't tell you what she did yesterday, gettin myself in trouble –laughs- uh, just you know all kind of things. : working on my website is kind of major thing. uh she helped me with my course notes with my class coming up. : 'cause every time the software changes the course has to be fixed.  : annoying. yeah once a year basically they just –– all they do is take all the code and rearrange it. : it would be, it would be like somebody comes to your house and rearranges all your drawers so like puts you know your silverware over here, and your socks somewhere else, and like oh god. -interviewer laughs- why did they do that? it's dumb you know maybe a few things, the organization makes sense but general it's just annoying so yeah, every year.  : hmm, clear goal. if i had a clear goal i, i don’t think i'd be interested it making it. : yeah, hmm. i think you're always kind of um searching for that goal, yeah. i did, at one point i was invited to do a lecture on the [artist 1] at [museum 3] and i took two and a half months off of making my work and i just researched him. and it made me realize if i had known that much about him, i probably wouldn't have made the same kind of artwork i'm making now. : 'cause he had a lot of the same interests and you know light and space and um phenomenological perception and you know experiencing you know space and, um, so you know, he was working thirty years earlier with you know different media but still, you know, he was pretty much interested in a lot of the same things so i –– yeah i really feel like if i'd known what he was really up to i probably would have –– you know, i'd be on a different track. : yeah probably, i mean i can only sorta guess, but... : no, no, not really, no.  : i guess so yeah. : yeah. : yeah, i think initially i wouldn’t of you know, yeah, i wouldn't of –– i think a lot of times when you're younger um, and you know a lot of teachers say this to people you know so and so already did this. : so i think that’s the stupidest thing to tell somebody.  : yeah, that shouldn’t yeah, i know i'm contradicting what i said sort of, i think it is something that when you're a younger artist you're really sensitive too, you try not to repeat what somebody else is doing.  : mm, that never works. -both laugh- i, you know i've tried. and i still end up doing the same things, like same interests, so yeah.  : sure. yeah, definitely.  : uh huh, my parents. : if i have to deal with them\ : \i can't work. : so i actually blocked their phone, i blocked them, they can't call me.  : they can only email me. : yeah. : hmm. well, it's all ab –– does school count? -laughs- 'cause uh i don’t know at least 8 hours a day doing artistic stuff. : yeah. i mean there's a lot of really like, i mean, maybe a lot of what i do isn't artistic stuff 'cause it's like –loud clanging noise- (inaudible, 57:44) like, if i'm written about i have to spend a lot of time scanning that and getting that ready for my dossier\ : \for school, for promotion which is a huge, huge endeavor but i do have like a, really like good dossier. it's like a big, it's like a huge scrapbook. but so i don’t know if that would count as an artistic endeavor it's just you know tedious stuff that comes you know or working on my website. : you know, stuff like that. keeping the bio up to date, or every time i'm in a show there's, okay, the bio gets added to then there's reviews and you know all this stuff that comes along with it and takes hours\ : \you know just to do that kind of thing? : like in art? : um, if i'm under a deadline, and mak –– i'll be working 18 hours a day.  : and then sometimes waking up in the middle of the night to run a render or to check something then go back to bed. : i mean especially you know if it’s a looming deadline. : so i mean that's –– yeah i don’t like to do that but, yeah but i don’t know that often that happens. maybe i don’t know i don’t want to admit it. right now i don’t have a looming deadline so i can talk to you on the phone. -both laugh- oh what time is it? : okay. : mmkay. : yeah. : uh, at –– probably seven or eight hours let's see (counts). yeah, seven hours. : mhm. : um, well yeah there's number of pieces, yeah. : and there's sort of series. : you know there might be like generally um at the most fifteen pieces in a series and after that i get kind of bored. : you know, feels like production than making the work. : once i get a series going its actually sort of easy you know you just, i mean i still have to make a lot of variations but it –– already you know the direction of it, all the kind of major decisions are kind of made and then it's you know um, you know it's less stressful but it is kind of fun... kind of hard to explain. : i think i'm making less um than i have\ : \but it might be my parents fault –interviewer laughs- i'm not sure, or could just be getting older i'm not sure either, but since 2012 i've been dealing with my parents. : and i imagine there's if you look at how much work i've made –– i mean you can look up my website and kind of get an idea. : but sometimes i go back and make more variations on a series from the past. : so it’s a little hard to track exactly what i'm doing in a year.  : i probably make more.  : -laughs, then interviewer laughs- i don’t know, god i don’t know. um i have no idea. i th ––  um hmm, no idea.  : i'm never done with my work : no, if you if, yeah i'll retool it i'm a very annoying. –interviewer laughs- yeah i've retooled a few things, a lot, almost everything actually but yeah some things maybe too much. but yep it's never done.  : hmm... well yeah, i think i do use associations. i have a really awful memory but um, except for certain things, like software and computer things i can remember everything which is so boring –both laugh- um, i think when you need it the idea pops into your head that, whatever the association or whatever it is, thankfully.  : mm, um i think i have an appreciation of strangeness. : yeah but like hmm i'm uh, i get too bored. i don't know if that’s psychological i think it seems like it is. : yeah, want things to be more interesting. : both. -both laugh- : i'm extremely focused\ : \and detail oriented, but it's really easy to distract me too. um gee what did you just oh i'm absentminded i'm kidding.  : i'm um -snaps fingers- i don’t know if i like, compared to other people if i'm terribly absentminded or not, maybe. i think stress causes absentmindedness, so yeah.  : um both, oh god –– i always look at both side of something so sorry.  : i feel like i'm both, equally both.  : hmm, yeah. i mean i do these huge things that are like in your face, and i don’t seem to be able to stop it so yeah i must be uninhibited.  : hmm depends on about what. : impulsive... yeah i guess so.  : huh, uh you'll probably link those together. -interviewer laughs- um i think i have this view of compulsive from seeing my mother\ : \and i'm not like that\ : \i think you have to be somewhat compulsive in order to do really tedious things, so you, you know just do them and get them done with. : so i think a little bit helps. i think out of control compulsive is just so horrible, so if you mean out of control compulsive i don’t think i'm that.  : uh, um nobody has ever said that i have either of those things. : that’s it? that the most important question?  : that gives it a lot of prominence, i don’t know we've covered a lot hmm. well i think more people need to um appreciate creativity and understand it, and understand adaptive unconscious decisions about you know making things, and i think that’s completely fascinating to study that as well. if i had another life or maybe if i was a billionaire i think maybe i would study that too.  : um, i'm definitely slower. i appreciate slowness more. i liked things much faster. um, i'm probably more conventional than i used to be. uh, yeah. i probably just did things uh like a little wilder when i was younger, i imagine.  : hmm, well i switched from abstraction to representation, that’s pretty big switch. : uh oh. : oh great well...  : aw, thanks [interviewer] : ...oh, gosh.  : uh... right now, i mean it's kind of personal. but it's like, um, making it through this divorce and taking care of myself and my kid, um, independently\ : \the financial independence.  : um, my art, actually. : i think, uh yeah, i mean i know my teaching career and the shows i get, i mean, but my teaching career comes from the shows that i have and my production.  : and um yeah, yeah.  : but  : oh, but, but, that's not the only thing, i'm sorry. god. i misrepresent that, that's like crazy. it also has to do with, um... with like all the aspects of healing work i've done.  i really struggled at first, um, in this whole process, so i've been just doing a lot of healing work. so maybe that's it, the healing work is maybe what i'm most proud of because it permitted me to get, to follow through these jobs because i had some self-sabotaging moments, too. : yeah, i do. and i don’t think i honestly thought that for a number of years. i was more invested in practicality and sexual-ist stuff but now, um, the past number of years it's totally been that.  : …um, i think it has to do with therapy, psychotherapy, um, introducing me to ideas of compassion because before that, um, you know, my - i got ms like right after grad school which was induced by this intense, -inaudible, 3:49- project, um – that was in –inaudible, 3:53- and i was sleep deprived and i had muscled my way through it.  : and in the years following that, i was renowned from muscling my way through extraordinary endeavors and my ms was like a work-around. you know, i just kind of like – um, but that was my way of even moving to the ms and i believe i've made more progress in, in healing or feeling okay about it than this, this other work.  : i like my work again.  : i also like my artwork.  : two things. the, uh, the processing of trauma. : and the physical overcoming. there is a way i can get through compulsive anxiety, um, and whether it was ms induced or old age, my anxiety and depression have increased in the years as i've gotten older, um, and - so working physically and then like – so this isn't some –inaudible, 5:35- of overcoming, it's sort of like, i will overcome – no, that's not quite right. it's more like, i will draw... even with these symptoms, even though my sensitive touch may not be there. i will still – now i like it, near as approved to push through, like i accept it. : so that part is good for my ego and confidence and self-care. and then there's the, the other part of processing the trauma through like – ah you know, fucked up childhood or inequity that i think are –inaudible, 6:16-. stuff like that. : yup. : yup. and sometimes, maybe even not using metaphor. maybe i'm like so fucking direct\ : \that i didn’t have a fucking clue until somebody point it out after it's made. : or even years later i'm like, oh man, look at what you've been doing.  : ha! you know, like i won't even know. i'll come up with this whole other rationale.  : … um, probably like self-love\ : \or the entitlement to love, from another. self-love, self-care\ : \those are hard\  : \full on effort. like i can build a house. i can care - you know, like even if i drop down and become dumb, i'll wait until the symptoms are over, i'll carry the damn thing. i'll make a special rigging. i'll -  i can do that, like push through, but the actual like inner love stuff. : yeah. : yeah. : yes\ : \um, last summer, um, i did a, um, project... out in [location 1], well i showed, i exhibited this project, before that, maybe the year prior, i did it – i did the –inaudible, 8:13- and the video work in the [location 1] and that was the first one where i felt anything, um, like self-love and let the work not be as didactic and had a lot more compassion and tenderness in it.  : so, i feel like that's really important piece right now. it's like my favorite –inaudible, 8:39- post. : um, i have new work that just opened up at [museum] and i like that show too. i feel like that one's kind of tender. but it's, it's hard for me to get to that vulnerable place, like in the work. so – but those two i'm liking right now. : oh gosh, the um... the one that showed last summer in the [location 1], took almost two years to make. um, and it was a collaborative piece originally and, um, my collaborator backed out. he and i became romantically involved and um, and he, he couldn’t handle this emotional bullet and um, backed out and i had to do all sorts of processing to make the deadline. forced me into getting into that therapeutic space and shift with his work because we were supposed to be collaborating so it was like the two things were tandem and i couldn’t separate it out. : yeah. : yeah, and i like that, and i need that, and it makes it okay for me to not make enormous, heavy, cultural interventions all the time.  : now i don’t have to physically suffer.  : now i don’t have to prove myself with construction tools, um, but i can let myself be - and i'm still talking language, don’t get me wrong, there's plenty of content in that work. : but there's so much like uh, language around transformation, you know, like there's one video with me and my collaborator and then i had to go back to the same site by myself and do a performance, you know, and i dug a hole in the [location 1] and like put my body in it and, you know, kinda did this whole metaphor\ : \of rebirth, sort of. : and, uh, ran around naked and did a whole performance thing. : but it was, uh, it was good for me as a middle-aged woman who had been running around like that – it was good. it had a lot to do with body love, too, um, because again with the multiple sclerosis it's like i lose my balance, i'm not very elegant, i walk off, you know, like a little, you know - i work out and everything, but you know, but there's things that are irregular or not aesthetically ideal. : … um, hold yourself in balance between yourself and not chase - trying to please. like there's not one singular voice in the artworld. and that like the art world is not unified, and so being, true to yourself, you know, which seems so easy, but it's not. and the flipped part of that, or the other component, is also, you know, you don’t have to be such a purist, you know, you can –inaudible, 12:47-12:56- (phone breaks up)  : yeah, and you can sell things or you know, you can participate in the market a little bit. you know, it's really not so bad, so –inaudible, 13:13- yourself. you gotta keep that balance, keeping your roof over your head. : i have no – i don’t keep track of that stuff.  : my detriment. i've been really shitty about - i don't keep track.  : you gotta be honest, you gotta get out and look at work, but i can't buy into this –inaudible, 14:03-  : you know like\  (phone cuts out, 14:08-14:12) : \ like in school, maybe you show up at a lot of shit, you know, run around, but you got to be in the studio, gotta know what you care about. gotta make the work.  : but it is good to have a few loyal friends, that's the social concept. that's the goods. a few loyal friends –inaudible, 14:33- you know\ : \-inaudible, 14:38- people you can be real within your studio. that's irreplaceable.  : well, i'm a late bloomer, so i'm the example everybody gives about like a late onset career. um, the problem with that is that you get tired. so, it's the point when you might need that extra push, you feel like you're ready to put the feet up. but, um... so i think it is good to start somewhat early. but on the other side, you need something to talk about so, um, i don’t think my work is shallow.  : because of what it does for horizontal and lateral thinking. like we need more and more of those to be thinking and i think the creative mind for grabbing from multiple possibilities and assembling in different context is the necessity.  (emergency vehicle passes in the background): um, i don't think we can, uh, you know – the corporate ladder, the linearity of the corporate ladder and the linearity of um, cartesian dualism, like logically, it's just not - most things are hybrid now.  most things are, um... on a continuum, are on a spectrum. that's where we're living. so, i think we need to think horizontally and associatively to permit representation of the spectrum.  : both.  : the responsibility is really important to me –inaudible, 16:58-17:02- but the pleasure is key. i had to abandon, you know, my art for a little bit and find my joy again and –inaudible, 17:18-17:22- (people talking in the background) i believe in that.  : well, um, i mean as a kid, i was drawing all the time. and i did all my sister's book report covers and, uh, and i worked in clay and my family gave me ceramic classes that didn’t make any sense to her. so, it's something i've always loved and i never thought of it professionally but with college – and then in college, on my mom's side, i'm the first-generation college goer, um, so i was an activist in college. my - i think i've already said my major. i planned to graduate  - inaudible,18:34 - for environmental studies and, uh, so i uh, i was an activist –inaudible, 18:42-18:51- (phone line breaks up) and uh, i did a couple murals. so, it was the posters and to start thinking that it was the posters bringing me to my thing. pretty much brought me to my loving art. i enjoyed it, loved it more and more and more. : and me and my friends opened up a, um, -inaudible, 18:14-18:16- nonprofit café. and this café was giving me space, an art space, and there i saw the potential of creative endeavors and making something out of nothing. that spark. what it does for culture is way more effective. like sure, you've got a blockade for stuff, you got to have fighting power sometimes, but as a constant, it wasn’t as generative as like that simple - well not so simple, creative act. so, that whole thing gave me permission to focus on the creative stuff and be an artist, more and - you know, i had jobs working at legal aid. i worked in a soup kitchen. i worked at community action agencies. for years, that's what i did. my whole identity for like, for twelve years, -inaudible, 20:11- but i always had energy for art afterwards -inaudible, 20:19-.  : um, a combination of pleasure and, um, a puzzle, something i have to figure out. like maybe an opportunity presented to me and i just can't let go, i've got to figure this out. alright i'll do it. you know, and then i do it. there was a time, a couple times, where i was really obsessed with prestige and that made me sick. eventually it kicked up my ms and like anxiety - that kind of anxiety about prestige and not being good enough i feel symptoms –inaudible, 20:17- like i feel numbness in my leg, like around not being good enough or that i'm kind of excluded or i'm – or i can't, like i’m being cast out. so, i just stopped it, like - so, that was the big thing. : less involved in art? : yeah, yeah. : oh yeah.  : and when? after the divorce. : after the divorce, my survival felt so precarious. : i was like, "fuck art", i'll anything. i need work. -inaudible, 21:52- and, uh, i was angry that, you know, i didn't – i was struggling so much financially.  : i gave it all up.  : i had a sale, i gave away all sorts of stuff. i did a ritual. a spiritual ritual, just like, that's it. and then, i don’t know, something kept talking to me. so... i guess it was [location 1] project. : oh no, no, no there was another project. it was another project along the [location 2]. that one came up.  : maybe 2014\ : \'13? 2013?  : maybe a year.  : i was living in my studio and i moved out to an apartment. i couldn't afford another studio, i had like a live work space and i hated it there, and i was like "fuck this shit" and that's when i did that ritual. : and then, um, looking for an apartment and, um, my son wasn't very happy there and that helped me feel - i ended up with more teaching possibilities and, um, slowly things have been improving\ : \stabilizing.  : um, [artist 1], and um, i owe him tremendous amounts and um... uh, and then... i don't know, like, um... i, i - he's just the first one that comes to my mind. : and i – yeah. : i lost a lot of friends when i went through that ditching art it was right after my gallery dropped me. i had a lot of friends who were very - who were high profile artists and they dropped me and, uh, i had to go through a crisis and been slowly rebuilding friendships here in [city 1]\  : \with creative people.  : yeah. oh, its hell.  : it was kind of like all systems fell. : like this forced recalibration, you know.  : yeah. : grad school.  : yeah, i was in grad school with him, he was a teacher, and, um, i just owe him so much. um, and i was trying to make work to please him and then i threw it out the window when i went through the crisis, and came to really care for him anyways still, you know. -laughs- : even though i wasn't going to be, you know, brave –inaudible, 25:49-. cause he still was kind to me, generous. : i learned so many theoretical ways of thinking. i would say post-colonial theory blew my mind and that’s where i really got the nuts and bolts for thinking about ideas of hybridity and questioning purity and growth. -inaudible, 26:20- but also that fused with the politics of race and identity, so.  : [college 1].  : he teaches [college 1] : yeah.  : i don't talk to him that much as i used to\  :  \like a lot of the people i was in the clique with are good friends with him, but he's still very nice to me.  : yes. : i think that guidance –inaudible, 27:11- perfection, very complicated, just yourself and identity, views into the business, um, the market is unregulated, so a lot of nefarious stuff happens –inaudible, 27:28- : um, i don't think so.  : it has so much to do with their smarts and how good they are at making art but it also has to do with your psychological ability, you never know, it's really hard, i think. i wouldn't have been able to think that i've come this far, you know. i had a lot of friends who were better artists than me who aren't – who don't have half the career i have.  : yes.  : i felt so guilty when you asked me that question\ : \i can't find the woman who was as generous with me... and it made me very sad. although i do know, i've had great singular conversations with women, um, but it’s a very difficult field, you know. you have a bad ratio, right, thirty to seventy percent is typical\  : \in representation. so even though there's more women in art school, only thirty percent end up with representation in the gallery.  : and to keep that percentage, you know, it's cutthroat. it's very competitive, and then if you choose to have kids, you’re like exhausted. it's, it's, it's really very hard.  : women might – i mean maybe i can't, i can't say –inaudible, 29:55- women – there is a couple of women artists who all left town, okay, but they – i would feel – this i have to say. so, like, i didn't have a women leader or mentor but i had female colleagues and unfortunately those that are closest to my heart aren't here in [city 1] anymore, because they made choices to choose their quality of life over their profession. however, they're still, now, they're still super professional, they're still really at it, and, um, so, we've always been close and i couldn't do anything without them. it's just [city 1] was a very hard place to live. expensive. you know, not a great place to raise kids without a lot of money, so i understand why they made their choice. but these women who did have children and are also great international artists, i owe them. and, and, but then again, i don't see them all the time, you know. maybe like once a year. : that you never are fully in balance. you just have to accept it. there's always a ball that will drop.  : well, i think that's what i’m striving at. that's like - now, you know, with those old friends having left town, you know, i'm making new friends, i'm making really interesting relationships, uh, with women and queer folk and i love the discussion and, and people of diverse ethnic and racial backgrounds and, and so i'm always stimulated by this fusion of our subjectivity and just being on the continuum and, um, it's really inspired by [author 1] book [book title 1]. so, it -  : sometimes i think people with some blue-collar background who have a relationship to labor, can tolerate, um, what it takes to work so much, and maybe coming from sort of a mix, you know, like my family is a little bit mixed, in that my dad married a puerto rican woman, um, half of my siblings are puerto rican, half-greek, and, um, i think i... i, i like that. um, um, i think they fuel my search for this lateral, associative, um, identity and to articulate like, you know it's like "hey what's in media, what i'm looking at, doesn't represent me". so, i gotta communicate, gotta share something, you know? : even though there's so many other people around me, but it's just not – you know, i wanna see it. : well, my ex-husband had a lot of issues with competition and um, like him being like an ivy league school trained, and all of his family are like legacy kids and um... he grew up with danish modern furniture\ : \and everyone is so well educated and you know i felt like the bull in a china bar, and i was when i went there, you know. and he shamed me a lot\ : \for my taste, and i just didn’t realize it. like i loved his family, mind you, you know we would sit and read the new yorker or harper's magazine and i thought it was really beautiful, i never met people like that. um, my family was loud and you know... i don’t know. so... um, so yeah. he informed me about taste and education and intellectual, um, communication or social benefits. not just like – i mean i already was doing that with my friends at school and all that stuff and as an activist, but not family. i thought it was really cool that family could do that. so, but you know also, so, we're very competitive and would not help. he, um, he would always say, "your career doesn't bring in as much money potentially as mine will. me as a potential trained person needs the priority over and above your work." uh... and uh, so he wouldn't – like once he flew to a show of mine in [country], um, and that was even before i had [child], and so once i had [child] i was like "bring the kids and then we could be here together!" nope. no way. he wouldn't do it. all my other friends who have like kids, um, had their significant other or their moms or their mother-in-laws coming along or could afford nannies. i couldn't. i always had to leave [child] to do those trips\  : \and it broke my fucking heart. : yeah.  : yeah. : um, choosing to support myself for him has been really great. um, moving out of that studio because he didn't, wasn't happy there. so, he is my priority and i like that, it made me feel very good to come to that, um, but i felt like the two were pitting against each other. : sometimes i wish he liked art more, he always – he built this thing of like art memes. you’re not going to be into it with me or i lose connection as his mom in an art context, so he doesn't like opening those up very much. but, um, but he's a good artist actually... he's very creative.  : my stepmother was, um, but she died.  : yeah. i mean i'm the oldest of five. : not really. my brother, he cooks now. he works as a chef, i think he's the most creative one. so, he's the one – he's the most creative. but my three sisters not much, not at all actually.  : -inaudible, 38:30- domestic craft : but not with any great, um, funk or thought.  : it's more something to do with their kids. : um, well mostly from life but also research, right? like i'm very indebted, um... to all sorts of sculptors. i looked at dimensional objects in space a lot. and uh, yeah.  : well, in an ideal world i'll have one lined up before i finish, because that moment when one ends, after the total immersion, um, then i've always got - the house is like a mess, i owe my kid time, so then i have to back off and do that. and, um... and then there could be a challenge to getting back into the studio, um, with as much like, um, focus because now i've stopped and i have to clean up my mess. and so, i like to try to line something up, um, while things are finishing up so i can start the next immersive one pretty easily.  : i don't want to get slumped down into a depression, they call it sometimes post-show, because you're sleep deprived and like you're, um, you know, your adrenaline drops because you’re no longer like pushing through in this incredible way. you know? : yeah, yeah. : \so i make sure i jot it down, take it seriously because i've learned the hard way that you might lose that thought. like don't say, "oh, i'll get to that later", no no no no no. you got to like, set it up. : um, like at that time because it will go away. and i don't know if that's the ms that has made my memory bad or what, but it will go away. so. : yeah. : both.  : if it's completely different it’s a reaction to what i'm working on right now\ : \or it's in relationship to a show, like just somebody has just offered me a show, then, you know, i'm grappling with that, those parameters, or, two things, or it's like ripping off of what i'm just in the midst of. i didn't used to do that, i was kind of for some reason always jumping to the most stimulating - like, you know, i, i regret that i didn’t permit myself to make these small moves, like drift to the next thing, in like a series, but now i do that.  : ...that's not my problem.  : my bigger problem is i, i have so many ideas. my bigger problem is actually, um, organizing my time and my money to permit my immersion in to the next thing. so, if like an opportunity comes but it doesn’t come with a grant or funding, then you know i slow down a little bit if i have to work extra hard at my day jobs and so i'm always trying to grasp - because i don’t have that much money and my kid's a priority, i’m always grappling with, “ok, gotta fundraise for this thing…”, you know, things like that. so, the logistics are slowing me more than the ideas. 
 : now? : intuit – now intuition is taking over. : yeah. : yes. : more intuitive.  : did i say intuitive or did i say rational?  : intuitive\ : \it's intuitive. yeah. because i am so analytical. i can’t separate out like all the language of ideas. i start with ideas and i have to allow room for the intuition, for the expression, for the emotionality, to manipulate the ideas further. i'm no longer wanting to do a one-to-one rational explanation of the idea. i personally needed - that's the stuff i was telling you about, like that shift into validating my own…associative, um, and subjective horizontal understanding of the world… is important. so, but it starts with the idea which is rational and then i add that [inaudible, 45:04].  : but that intuitive stuff is harder, i’m better with ideas, like literal – like, i will, you know, talk about displacements in housing, you know –inaudible, 45:22-, you know. that's easy for me. it's the other stuff that i grapple with.  : walking, hiking, meditating. you know –laughs- it's kinda crazy, but even like the old surrealist kind of like nap kind of thing. like right before falling asleep, um, right at the moment of waking up, um, or driving. all those are my biggest goodies, my biggest, greatest time... um, to get back, to resolve, or to make the next move in the work.  : i like to have eight, um, but then when i'm in super production mode it’ll be probably six. um, but the problem, you know - six i can function, anything less, i’m like a wreck. and i used to be alright on three and stuff like that but i can’t do that anymore. like i won't. : yeah. : yeah, totally. i carry a sketchbook all the time.  : uh, depends on the work, like if i’m really stuck, i, i re-draft a lot in fabrication, trying to figure out the form of something, and so, this last piece i did at the [museum], must have done like twenty drawings - (drops phone) hi, did i lose you? : yeah, just for one version.  : but they're not like, you know - they're like the schematic drawing, so.   : yeah : i used to have one book, like a thin little book, like a moleskin for each project that i do. so, i put in lots of writings, source materials, notes for fabricating - i put everything in it, and the drawings. : um, alone for the ideas but a team for the fabrication.  : especially if it's a big project. if it's one of those big physical ones, because like i said with the ms i don’t like to do it alone so much, um, but, um, i mean the [museum] i worked with two professional fabricators, like a glass blower and a metal smith\ : \but everything else i did alone : so, but they just did these particular points but i pulled it all together, you know. so that was not really a team, it was more like, “okay, give me that one service, and you give me this other service”, you know. : uh, yeah. but i always have to shift it.  : you know it’ll change, i have to allow it to change. : yeah. : yeah, totally. : … not really\ : um... you know, i don’t think so.  : well, um... okay so, this is a case where the object at the [museum] - i worked with the glass blowers and the glass blowers - or like glass blower, um, i was assisting him. we blew, we blew nine pieces of glass and five of them survived, um, and three of them are in the museum, now. and i have these two extras that are artists proofs. so, while i was blowing them i was thinking, i was thinking about, um, orgasm as generative and, and so i made these like small glass pieces, appendages, that are attached to the form that reminded me of clitorises, sort of large, and um, anatomically, um, rendered and exaggerated and um… so, now i have these two artists proofs with these clitorises. um, during the show though, however, was talking about labor and was talking about the un - under-recognized, um, press crew, um, at the [museum] and, um, and it was about this one, um... preparator who died, who was found in the parking lot dead\ : \after work and, um, and about justice, about like the justice in the art world to pay laborers their just due. so, i’m, i'm thinking about, you know, that kind of economy. but then now with this artist proof, i’m thinking about the economy, i'm now thinking of a feminist perspective around harnessing the power of the erotic. : so, i found this text by [author 2] called [book title 2], and i read that and i was like, "okay i can work with that". so, now i'm no longer thinking about labor in the museum, now i’m thinking about, you know, women's orgasmic energy to be transformative and a challenge to, you know, to the status quo or being a structure in itself, actually. : so, now i’m trying to draw the metal forms that are going to support these artist proofs, um, and have them take on this sort of erotic power, um... meanwhile i know one i want to sit on a tabletop, and one i want to be mounted on the wall… and i’m going to work with iron, mild steel, and bend it and then take them to a, um, uh…. -inaudible, 53:47- place... does that answer your question?  : it changed.  : because they were vessels. : they were these forms that were going to hold, i was thinking of like to hold the um, the, these - ok so this one worker was found in the parking lot, like with a jackhammer - cut a big hole and filled it with red concrete next to the shards of the asphalt and put it in the vessel, so these vessels are containers. but i didn’t want them to replicate the energy of, or the, no - i didn’t want them to replicate the ideas of womanist vessel, like she’s hollow and trying to be filled with other stuff. : so, that's why i put this orgasmic thing that was energy, so instead of it being a cock, which is a source of power, now it's like the female equivalent. so, i was just trying to undo patriarchy a little bit\ : \by saying okay this is still -inaudible, 55:16- energy, it's still - you know, it's still like they’re creating, they're making stuff. they’re making stuff happen but it's not, um, you know, it's not a cock that's doing it. 
 : but it's, it's just – yeah. : uh...no. it's, it's, like i said, for me it's more of an issue of being disciplined\ : \and structured - get to the next thing. soon as i sit down i have so many, and it's the clarity. like right now i’m working with another organization on this proposal and we still can’t come up with a consensus, like\ : \you know, it's supposed to be like site-oriented projects and they’re supposed to help you get the site. so, i chose a site, gave them buildings i wanted to work with, they’re supposed to facilitate me doing this video shoot, and now it's been a year. she can’t get permission. none of the buildings in downtown [city 1] want me to do this project there.  : i cannot get them. so, finally i was like, “well, i’m gonna expand it, see who you can get”. now she’s trying anything she can. she still can’t get anything. so now i’m like, “alright”, you know. so, that was one shift. you know, “choose any site”. now i'm like alright, do i – let's – maybe i just avoid this - that shoot. maybe i make a different video, or maybe i do that video if that opportunity comes at a different time but i’m not going to make your deadline of a show in november if that, you know, site location doesn’t come. so, i, so i adjust, right? so, now i have three proposals on the table, you know? : and, and so, i'm, i’m pretty good at generating ideas, : \that's not my issue. -laughs- : oh gosh, so you’re not counting teaching, right? because it's hard to just -inaudible, 57:47-\ : so, right now i’m, you know, setting up this, um, new program at [college 2], so i’m in putting a lot of time with the teaching, but i kind of put that on hold and did nothing but this project and install for the show. but it's constantly – see that's the thing, it's hard for me to delineate, everything i’m doing is for my art, you know. : so, the teaching, i’m reading things and i'm having the students read things that, that i’m psyched about and interested in and everything is sort of blurry, you know. i’m constantly consuming material, you know, that's related to the work. it's very hard for me to, uh - my life as an artist is – i'm not a –inaudible, 59:14-. some people have, they set the strict boundaries, i don’t have that, i’m like doing it, a lot, in little nooks and crannies, all - every little one i can get away with. it's probably why my kid hates it so much.  : you mean like - are you talking about success? like i'm more likely to get a big commission based on a theme that had multiple versions before it? is that what you’re saying?
 : that i’ve noticed.  : and it's not necessarily the merit of the work, but that it will get more, you know, traction.  : as for me, um... maybe that's the case with a drawing or iteration, it gets better, but… not so much, it's not so much. because i’m such a project-based artist. i don’t know if you’ve looked at the work that i’ve done, i actually make a lot of big pieces\ : \that are installations and they have so much labor in them, then when they're a really big piece, um, i can’t say i’ve made another iteration, you know. it's like... yeah, i definitely have a project-based practice so it's like, it's like a binge.   : yeah, yeah. : time. : i let myself move on. i just have to. : because i can overwork things and add too many flourishes and stuff like that.
 : well, it's more because the installation show is up, you know.  : uh huh. so, it's like logistical.
 : like than other people? : um, people tend to say that i always choose the hardest route and like i'm crazy with labor so, i don’t know if i spend less time. i think it's more like the intensity of it, like i said i’m a super binge worker. : like i have to go so dive-deep, but i can’t stay underwater without coming up for air that long because of having a kid. so, um, i don’t know what other people do. i imagine there's a lot of people who plug along, chug along, you know. set up tasks for themselves, keep chipping away at the tasks. 
 : fewer.  : yeah.  : 'cause i kind of know i - there may not be many people in town that work as big as me. : yeah.  : i'm kind of newly going forward.  : it came about in grad school. : mhm. : well, what you just said, this is more pertinent to me than the first one you said.  : the first one felt a little like a stretch, like a very forced studio practice. : you know when people make iterations of things and maybe painters or people who work in series. um, but i don’t work in series overtly. so, um, how do i put my ideas together? i think it has a lot to do with the associative thinking and trying to... sometimes it's material. i let a material kind of like –inaudible, 1:05:47- how to like put that material to do this other thing. how can i let this material talk about this, which is the best way i can get it to talk about... this idea, this concept, or this emotion.  : uh... writing. you know i've kind of used – like i said, the naps, the driving, and the shower, um, making the work in my head, running through all the steps, and then something comes up that's really cool. um... i haven’t done this this year, but in the past, i've kind of slept with my work. i’ll take a nap next to it.
 : yes. totally.  : touch.  : -inaudible, 1:07:24-. touch, it's spatial. : i get a sense of how it's occupying the room if i’m lying down next to it, so i can feel its presence. : but for me standing up, as the person who's being malleable with the materials, i'm now in this reposed position to absorb information about what it's doing in space. : totally about like sitting with it. like it's just this bodily inhabitation and letting myself being in a little bit of an altered state with it.  : you know, i try not to be too much of a cigarette smoker or, or, you know, but sometimes i do need to like unwind in its presence. so, sometimes like i’m just hanging out with it, right. : i'll watch some stupid shit on tv or, you know - so that i’m not always in productive mode and just let something slip in, you know.
 : both.
 s: nowadays, i forget things quickly. i have to jot them down. so, i have to make a list. if i don’t make the fricken list, i’m like monkey-brained during install. so, i have to make a list, cross things off. : add more. make a new list. i gotta do that, i forget. 
 : yup. : yup. : you know, i take pictures with my phone, too\ : \of stuff and put notes in there.  : yeah, i do that. but it's like, you know, i can go to home depot and forget the screws that i went - 'cause i remembered right before leaving the door that, "oh you needed windex", so all i think is the windex and i forgot the screws\ : \you know, i'm like that, you know. -inaudible, 1:10:06- thousands for these kinds of projects. i need so much material stuff, you know. 
 : sometimes yes.  : i’m dyslexic so that also – that comes up even more than the, people notice that i’m dyslexic more than, uh, absent minded actually. : i get into the series, like the ideas like that i don’t forget, i don’t forget those threads. : i’m constantly building the narrative, the story about things. and i'm plugging it in, i'm stroking it, i’m like, you know, i'm working it, i love it, you know. but the nuts and bolts and things.
 : yeah.  : but the engagement for me, if i was a fabricator exclusively, would be, you know, i wouldn’t be thinking about the theory, i'd be thinking about, “oh, how do i make - connect these two pieces of wood the most elegantly possible”, you know. : but my focus is more, “how do i connect these ideas as elegantly as possible” or “how do i, you know, represent this other thing and not be racist” and then rep - you know challenge patriarchy here and then, you know. i don't know.
 : yup, yeah, yeah.  : both. so, right? if i’m always using plaster and solving a problem with like mushy, shmooey stuff, i’m like enough with shmoo, [].  : um, and then on the other hand, i'll be like i'm -inaudible, 1:12:36- some sexual inhibition, so i'm working on some trauma around sexuality so therefore going in towards sexual metaphor and empowerment around it and honoring, you know, the history of women, um, i’m, you know, i'm, i'm going towards my fear. you see? : so, it's like okay. with this now, first series and maybe for a while, i will go towards this as my fear. in another place i was going towards my fear of making ends meet. and, you know, i was working on that. now, i’m working on, you know, these other, um, fears. but i always go towards my fears. it's the way i start production too actually. like, what is the thing i’m scared of here? alright, let's start chipping away at that. : sometimes. : never.  : i wish. -inaudible, 1:13:49- : i don’t think so. : well, like i said, i don't - i'm not worried about - i think when i was younger i'd be like, “will i ever have a show again?”. now i’m like, “of course i’m going to have another show, i’ll make my own show. i don’t care if people please me or not, you know, or give me some goodie. i'm less cow-telling to the situational power. : and, uh, so i'm, you know, so – what was the question again?
 : yeah, i feel like, yeah, i feel more empowered and less afraid. i feel like i've got nothing to lose. : i guess that i've always worked intersectionally.interview: uh huh.: always combined an awareness of race, class, and gender, and sexuality and each of those might pop up in different ways, but i, i feel really – as content even if things seem formal, i am thinking about those power dynamics and i’m -  so, it's just an implicit part of my life. so, the politics and my social awareness is always there, baseline, it can’t go away, i don’t believe in it going away. everything is political. so, i refuse any delineation that political art versus non-political art or, um, you know, like there's some way of - like if something is dominantly abstract in form there's still politics chosen in that piece. so, that's something i wanted to say.  : because art is a method of communication.  : even if it's not linguistic, it's communication for people who may not be exclusively or dominantly linguistic, but it is a communication. it is, um... yeah, it's communication. and, so, and i really defend people’s ability to, even if their work doesn’t seem like super-duper conceptualist rigor, um, the non - the malleable material and processing ideas, you’re still dealing with ideas, still dealing with information. but, people want to say, "well i'm not the only - ", "i'm, i'm just - ", "it's just the business of clay, and that's it", like well, that's an idea by the way. -laughs- so, um, so, yes, because it allows us to remember its merit, it's not just me masturbating onto something, but it's actually communicating then it reflects, it has merit and culture, it has social merit and we have to continue supporting it