: yes i am. : um... i guess uh, writing and acting. : um, a deep personal passion for those things. and uh, yeah, a deep personal passion. : um, sustained focus. : with repeated, repeated attempts i think. yeah, no real formula. just repeated trials and then failures and then get slowly better at it over time. : um, i guess. yeah i guess. wanting to finish a story that i haven't finished for a couple of years.  : um, no. no, i think it’s just from childhood uh... i think i was really intrigued by those things and um... i guess it's something i get a lot of pleasure and yeah stimulation out of, but not a specific thing i think that i can recall.  : um… just i think other people in those fields that were famous. : um... on [tv show 1], um or in movies, um... yeah. i guess it would be people in – famous people in comedy and [tv show 1] when i was growing up. : uh... well my career now, i think it's developed – do you think that's like the thing i'm doing right now or just my overall trajectory or? : however you want? : um, i think i - yeah just a lot of intellectual curiosity, and i think my intellectual curiosity uh, has a need to be kind of stimulated on a couple different fronts and so i feel like my, my interest kind of oscillates or bounces through a circuit of like three or four things, some that are technical, some that are financial, and some that are more purely creative i guess. and so i think the reason my career now as an attorney is because its hitting one of those things to try to sustain myself economically. but, i feel like i am always kind of bouncing in between the three, so that’s probably why i was doing more acting at one time, now more law, and in the future, we'll see which one it's on. : uh... i would say get a uh…i guess i would say try to produce as much original work as you can, as often as you can, and to try to be disciplined about it, more disciplined to do it on a regular sustained basis because otherwise, if you're just waiting for inspiration to strike, it will take forever and you won't get much done, so set aside a specific amount of time each day to produce something. : um, that's how i've gotten the most success but i don't – i haven't been able to sustain it. : yeah. yeah, i think so. a little more. uh, i think my perspective is different and i think it takes a little more organization than just um, inspiration. : i’d say fewer social contacts, but to approach people as directly and as often as possible that are in the field they you’re interested in, but i wouldn’t feel like you need to go just socialize, but i'd say be very direct by approaching people that you're inspired by.  : uh... no i it's -  i think the more you start to produce, the more your identity reveals itself.  : um, i think uh... the three interests primarily of technology, finance, and art... uh, well i guess technology will change our life, i think. i have a lot of conviction that it will change our life for the better, so i think that's the reason is that is has direct impact on your health and the art i feel like is uh, a very uh self-validating thing that makes you feel really unique and that you're doing something original to you. whether it's received by others or not, it's a way to almost i feel like really explore yourself and to see – to kind of stress test your brain to see what other types of scenarios and see what kind of complex thinking you're capable of. so, i feel like it really stretches your brain like a workout and i feel like the technical side is more of an immediate benefit to – like a necessity for your future health. : yeah, yeah. : not a responsibility. definitely an enjoyment, yeah. : yeah. : yeah, definitely. i think each one of those it's waxed and waned. : maybe usually a little burnout. like just to have a lot of exposure to it for a certain amount of time and then kind of uh... feel the need consciously or subconsciously for a distraction or a break from it and then switch to something else that's kind of a different type of stimulation. : um... : not necessarily. i mean it might have. it might have given me a break so that i could come back to it with more energy later but, i don't know. i don't know. : um, i think close friends are the sounding boards to kind of get excited about it with, to be excitable and uh... discuss it on a certain level, but i guess i haven't had a lot of people close to me that are really involved in those fields that uh – that i have deep discussions about that with. : um... : no, i don’t think so. : um, it doesn't feel like it's really important, but i like the idea of it. i think it would be nice. i mean, i'm not opposed to it, i just don't think it's – yeah i guess i haven't felt a calling towards it or a big desire to do it. : um, i think to encourage them to produce work. not to really tell them how to do it but give them a forum and a motivation and a structure and deadlines so that there's some type of accountability and there's a drive to produce stuff.  : i think there's more men in... in most of those fields. in the technical side, there are definitely more men, but there's more – women are quickly stepping into it more, but there's definitely an abundance of men in that field. and then, um, in performing and writing it's... it's fairly even i'd say, but the technical side isn't. there's more men.  : um... : i think in fervor and like aggressive about wanting to tackle the aging problem, i feel like there's more of a male push to tackle it.  : it feels kind of exploratory, almost like columbus like there's something kind of - like going on the moon or something - there's something a little ma – maybe male about it, a little, maybe. kind of breaking a lot of new ground, so it's almost like a macho, maybe it has like a macho undercurrent to it or something.  : um... yeah, i would say balance is important. um, i think it's important to have good communication upfront about what your expectations are with your, your work, how important it is, how much of your schedule it consumes, uh, so that you have a good foundation to cultivate a relationship that's, that's mutually beneficial.  : um, i mean for better or worse, i think there weren't a lot of boundaries. so, it was very open and invited to explore anything that was of interest, but i think it also wasn't very demanding to force me to produce more than i would have. : i just wasted a lot of it. i didn't really – yeah, watching tv, hanging out in the house doing not much. skateboarding. : yeah! yeah, my dad is definitely creative. my mom is kind of creative. uh, she's kind of creative. my dad is definitely creative. my sisters, not so much. : yeah, yeah. : i would say i am not very productive, not very prolific. yeah, low productivity. : not a lot. : a week i produce maybe a couple pages of writing. : so not much. : um... when – yeah, i guess when you feel like it's complete and uh, it... yeah i think when you feel like there's not much more you can think of to improve and you feel really excited about it. yeah, i think it’s when you're really excited about it. if you're not particularly excited, then i feel like something still needs to change. when you're really proud of it. : a lot, yeah. constant revisions. yeah, a lot of revising. : probably less. : no, not necessarily. it just takes longer to produce. : um, probably from my environment and growing up and also kind of a sense to shake things up a little to like maybe be a little subversive. but, probably my environment. : um, probably kind of the perspective i've had at different points in my life. um, people i've known, like personalities, have come across and um – but at the same time i feel like it's personalities that seem like they'd be dynamic. so, kind of like uh... like uh symbols that are like uh, the paragons of certain types of behavior or something like that. like very rebel – i guess rebellious people are risky, risk-taking people that kind of would do things that you'd be afraid to do. : what was that again? : so when i finish a problem, what determines which problem i'll choose next? : i think it's one that feels like it personally affects me the most or that i would get the most personal satisfaction out of. i guess if it's tech or science- wise then it's which one is going to directly impact my life the most and if it's creative, it's which one gets me uh, gets me excited and makes me feel like i have some ideas that i can contribute in that idea, in that area.  : yeah. yeah, definitely. : rationality is extremely important in the tech stuff, and i think it's also important in the writing, but the intuition, i think, is where the new ideas come from for, for probably both of those. if you want –inaudible 19:05- and write a really inspiring story, i think you have to kind of really tap into your intuition to generate some new ideas. : have i ever found a useful idea for one thing while working on something else? : uh, sometimes i feel like maybe when i'm at work a - as a lawyer, i'll get ideas stories.  : and maybe there's something about switching gears in my brain that will kind of allow some of that stuff to percolate. but, yeah, and sometimes when i'm really confined doing very methodical tasks like studying for the bar or doing something really specific, there's a tendency that my brain kind of wants to create, create outlets or other projects that i think is maybe an escape, but that's when sometimes you'll feel like you have really good ideas.  : um, mostly just free writing. just start writing what comes to mind. some outlines later, but mostly it's just to start opening your mind up to the subject and see what ideas your mind kind of gravitates to the most.  : alone. : um... to...try to consolidate it, to read over all of it, and then to pick which parts to keep, and sometimes i just read over it and then start over and to develop the parts from the previous writing you feel like – that you feel like seem more compelling. so, sometimes it's almost like you write a couple pages and the use those for reference and then start over. and, uh, kind of write a new version of those same things, but with maybe a little more of a strategic approach this time.  : an hour of writing, and non-work activities, four hours. : yeah.   : yeah, definitely.  : um... sustained attention. you have to just constantly circle through the whole - either story or the whole problem. if it's aging, keep going through the circle of what are the main factors, what do you think causes it, uh, why do we age – continually circling through the whole picture. and with the story it's a constant what's the main idea, what do the characters want, why is this person here, what is the main idea, what do the characters want, why is this person here. so to constantly circle through the whole thing to kind of keep the whole story in your mind so you can understand where the little pieces fit in. where the little pieces can – when i don't – can't really remember what they are tethered to. i kind of forget why they are there. : i think so in some ways. in some ways, yeah. : i mean i think – and i could be wrong – i think i can extrapolate like larger connections to things, like patterns, identify certain patterns. uh, macro and micro, like how certain micro... micro situations are kind of expressed on kind of a macro level and go back and forth between those. um, yeah. yeah.  : definitely distractible – i mean i definitely would say distractible, but i have the ability sometimes to pull good focus, but i'm very distractible. : uh, certain types of information i think i can retain really well. um, yeah, so if it's pivotal stull, i think i retain it pretty well.  : i don't think so. : i think it makes a lot of sense. i think you have to be really disciplined and to be disciplined you have to inhibit a lot of things to maintain focus on an idea. : i think i can inhibit certain ways of responding, or certain behaviors. i mean in terms of diet, i can inhibit certain things. hm... in terms of work, i think it's to inhibit distractions. i think that's the only kind of thing i can sometimes do that makes me feel more successful creatively is to inhibit distractions because it just seems like it goes hand in hand with focus. the more you can quiet down the distractions, the more you see a crystal image of what you're trying to figure out. : yeah, in certain ways, yeah. : hm... compulsive, impulsive... compulsive, i don’t know if people have said that, but i probably am a little - i think i am a little compulsive. a little.  : um, i sometimes have felt like that. i don't know if anybody has ever said that i have that, but i sometimes feel like i do. : hm... : i'm not really much more successful, but my approach has changed and i feel like it just needs to be more disciplined. more like time – like a specific amount of time you have to set aside to be much more regimented with the time you put into it. : i think uh... i think that creative expression is important because it's kind of – it's almost like a validation that you're alive. it's like a way to feel your pulse and to differentiate yourself from like every other think in the world, like a chair, a tv, or a person next to you, or what you've seen that when you're actually creating something, you're – it's like uh, it's a reminder that you're actually in this world. that you are here. whereas if you're not creating anything, there's nothing really new introduced in the world that you had any effect on, so it's almost if you - whether if you were here or not here, it wouldn't really – nobody would notice. but, whenever you create something, you know. it's a really strong validation that you're alive and that you are a unique individual, a unique person to differentiate yourself from the world. so, i feel like it's kind of a – almost like the validation you get in talking to a person or maybe like the validation children want from their parents when they're young to feel like they're important. but, to create something is kind of an immediate reflect of validation that you're, that you're alive.     : organizing a family that i have, marrying well. two great kids i'm proud of. moving to [city 1] to pursue a writing career. : having good parents and being able to retain lessons from other people. important lessons: life is short, don't worry what others think about you, pursue your own happiness, think about others, stuff like that. : i would say, stubbornness to realize something is not working, : usually takes someone else to say this isn't working out. but i've gotten better at it. : no. : yes. i wrote and produced a movie about twelve years ago and it had some positive influence and some negative. : it fulfilled a goal that i had, which was to have a movie that i had written in theaters. the negative was getting involved in unscupulous people/. it has a lingering effect that turned into a lot of should of would of could ofs. : i would say write a lot, read a lot, and um just keep practicing. : yes. : yes it has, well there's um a more realistic view of it. it's possible to just create your career out of nothing, but it's a bigger chance than i had realized it at first. now i write for a company, investment writer, it is creatively stimulating, but it is more stable compared to what i had embarked upon moving out here. : yes, mentors and peers. it's challenging to find the right people. at first, many social contacts and then dwindle that to a network that you can rely on. : yes, with a lot of turnover, mentors. a couple people. my father is one. mostly positive and also negative. my wife is one. mostly positive and a bit of a realist in nudging me into a particular direction. : the positive, just very persuasive and aspiration in my goals, you can do it type of stuff. very encouraging. and i shouldn't say negative as much as realistic with expectations and evaluating how a project went and where i am, in an arc of a career. : it is important. i have a mentee at work now, who, if the person has ambition and talent, then it's that is enjoyable. it's a way to pay forward. a way to reciprocate some actions that maybe someone did take with you or a way to compensate when there was a lack of it in your career. : well this is a different career than when i was a screenwriter. this is the investment writing career. there are different departments you need to learn about, a lot of work-specific details that i can help with and navigate through. it's a job that takes some self-starting and initiative, which this person seems to have. if i can navigate him down the right path without having to go to so many people, i think that could help a lot. and all of that helps with the overall function of the department and the team. : not so much. um, we just hired someone, a contract writer, who i am optimistic about her potential for success and then there was a previous one we hired and i was pessimistic and he ended up not working out. maybe i have a little inclination about it, but i'd say it's difficult to predict that. : demeanor. intensity, and then you know you can tell if someone is with it, just intellectually together, emotionally together. you can tell that, right? if someone comes to work on the project, the questions they ask. their body language, interest level, eye contact, things like that, intensity and commitment level you can assess. last time i saw you, you were an inch away from my face. chantel, she was great. i got a kick out of her. : we find more women enter, most have worked out really well. i don't think it's gender related. i work with a lot of women and most are very with it and together. i think their sense of the financial industry, that industry is male-dominated. i think there might be that extra incentive in proving people wrong. : work has its place and you need to be able to draw boundaries and that way, if there's a project with a crazy deadline that you need to stay late that's one thing. but if you're working for the sake of working and cranking some things out then you should find something better to do. it's really about drawing boundaries and having a balance. : yes, i haven't always been great at it, but i am now. sometimes saying no is the right answer. just say no. : yes, um creative mother and um social worker type outlook sometimes really helping others more than she's working on herself even, almost to a detriment sometimes. um and i grew up with two sisters and i have kids now and they share a bedroom even though they have their own room, they're so close. i would also say upbringing. i was in a different part of the house than my sisters. so i think independent, even isolated, different from their experience because they were together so much. three years between my sister and four years between the other sister. : sports, and um watching tv, friends, always had a sport going on. baseball, hockey, soccer, football. : yes, my sister, one of them created a start up company for girls to create their own dream fairy houses, so she has a business background but it is also creative. and the youngest one is a clinical psychologist but is a very good painter and writer. and they both know a lot about music, play the piano reasonably well, average or slightly above average. both are good affective writers, similar to me. both have a musical inclination and interest, almost like a technicality when it comes to music, not self-taught but could know about the instruments that are in a band and orchestra and know how they function and pick them out. : well this is, they're generate from the department heads and people in the field. we write marketing communication materials so it comes from above. but my own ideas in other avenues come from personal experience. my ideas when it comes to work, they are a baseline of my abilities and utilizing them, it's kind of what would work best here, not thinking of new things, but picking what type of writing i would do from the arsenal what might be writing a headline or an email or writing a page out of a brochure, figuring out the best, most effective way to communicate something more effectively. : at work it's really determined by the department head and creative director and campaign manager. for me personally, um i personally have a documentary subject that i want to write about and film, and that's what's next. either that there's a script i wrote where the partner had a lot of films made and it's well known. those are next with what i'd do outside of work. and that's just determined by inspiration. it comes from daydreaming, when i have some down time. i like to be busy and aggressively busy. i say that there's another problem i'd like to tackle. it's fun to know, it's almost like having something in the mail with you that's a surprise. it's fun to have projects that are out there for you. it makes life more interesting. that's my three year old daughter, she is our little scorpio. : yes. not for years though. well that was as a screenwriter it was difficult to figure out which projects were realistic and marketable, give you a paycheck. relying on people, going with gut instinct experience, not always necessarily choosing right. : rationality had a very important role in selecting this career, moving into a more corporate environment situation. intuition is what guided me when i was an independent screenwriter, i think that in retrospect was unsatisfactory. i didn't have upper great intuition. : no, i wouldn't say that. i would say that when it comes to putting food on the table and earning a paycheck there has to be a corporate structure. it's either created by yourself or by others. i tried to create it myself, build infrastructure when i could do it on my own it's very different to do, unless you're creating a franchise on your own, like harry potter or a superhero, it's very difficult to do. you would do the project, the one-off, it's hard to do the consistent project, or paycheck is tough. so that turned into structured, which is where i am now. : i'm sure i have. yeah i think oftentimes they're useful ideas, just a matter of if you have the time or resources to carry them out. this short documentary idea i had, i know it could be great, it could be an oscar nominated shot. it would take a fair bit of money, lots of people, a year to shoot. i do have good ideas quite often. it's a matter of assessing resources, money, time. : oftentimes i will go to others – in fact every time i will – even if they're just a sounding board. people who know how to carry it out – and it us starts with my wife and i’ll take to folks who know more about the logistics of it and the process. well, it gets to a point when you have to jump off the starting block and, you know, that’s something i've been good at over the years have the initiative to say, let’s do this. sometimes it’s being right s/t being wrong. i’ve been pretty good starting and finishing projects i commit to. versus strong urge to revise my work. my process with writing is to get it down on paper and know that it will take several revision to get it right and i think it that is never ending. i would say it's almost like you had an art exhibit and people are there and you want to touch the painting on the wall that are already being echibitined. i think there is a level of that/ there is a time when you day this is ready this is good, it feels right. there’s nothing more that i can do but there’s still another urge to rewrite.  : yes and at work it’s usually clearly defined. sometimes it’s we don’t know what we want, but we’ll know when we see it and that can be not as clearly defined. but what is clearly defined is that there’s a feeling that something is done and that's just a quality level that you would become accustomed to and at work it’s final it’s project related so when you finish a project, it’s done, but in my own creative work it’s a little less defined.  : no, i think that one thing through practice i’ve gotten good at going from one project to another. switching from projects that are completely different. i don’t experience writer's block and that took a lot of practice. and it’s when i start writing something, it’s not always material that’s any good or material that will endure the project and be something that’s kept in the end, but there's a continuous process. so, there’s never a time when i’m stumped and i cannot write anything. it’s kind of like working out. you may not be doing something that looks athletic but it’s part of a work out but there’s still some movement and you're still burning calories. that’s it – i’m not judging myself. it’s almost like anti-judging. saying that “i know this isn’t good and this is the way to do it,” and it might be editorializing something. so if i were to write a scene about a dinner with two friends, and one has a secret. this is what this scene is about and maybe this could happen. rather, i editorize it and work into something that becomes useful. so, you’re right, there isn’t judging. i know this isn’t going to last, but to get something on paper is the way i start. i’ve never been good at writing something that is perfect in one take. it’s usually something that’s total crap and the next draft it’s a little less crappy and then seven drafts later it’s pretty good. and i’ve learned to enjoy that process. confident in that it can be improved and that is integral to not using it.  : editorial tool – so if it were a scene and i need to write a couple of joes in the scene, i would always say “something about blah blah blah". i almost would do a sign post that this is where something related to this will go. rather than just being stumped and not writing. i keep a sign post to mark where things could be. and at work, if i’m writing a feature article, then i think about the structure from beginning to end usually three parts, three acts, and i’ll think about what those are and before ’ve done an interview, i’ll know what type of quote i want for the section. for work, it’s not heavy journalism and it’s light. they know the topic and want to know it’s good. it’s the fund managers talking about the fund they manage. but i can see the article before i start it. that's a brainstorm that takes an hour and the interviews would take another hour. i definitely have this process or part of the process when i think “i didn’t get what i needed, they hired the wrong guy,” then i think about the big picture and i don’t get lost in all the text i have. and the challenge i have and something i will do a save as and a new draft of something because i like the material. something you need to kill your darlings and cut material that you like. in movies you do that. every scene must have conflict and advance the story. you might have a conversation between two characters and it doesn’t have conflict and move the story forward, it shouldn’t be in there. so, the same thing with work – if i have a brochure about the topic and assume the reader has add and if it’s not the point then you need to cut. can i shorten this paragraph? can i make this line more concise?
 : i would say hard work – probably 3 hours or 4 hours and non-work, that depends. sometimes it’s none, sometimes it’s an hour. if i’m involved in an outside project, it could be several hours. : working out, listening to music, playing with kids, athletic sports, reading (though not frequently or very often), domestic travel (palm springs in a week, michigan, pittsburg). : yes. : yes, that sounds right to me.  : i think there's a direct correlation with # of revisions and quality (not always but with me) but here is also a correlation to amount or level of inspiration and amount of drive and quality that when i look back at old scripts, a project that i was really excited about – higher quality than something i was hired to write but didn’t think it was a super great idea but tried to carry it out for pay. : more. i’m more productive than the average person at work.   : probably less time per project than others. i think people do get writer’s block. so, while they’re taking the time figuring out what would be good. but i'm getting something on paper that might not be good but it’s any process to get it there.  : i would say experience, both in seeing and hearing things that have inspired me and then trying to draw from them. and then experience in just what’s happened in my own life. 
 : i wouldn’t say that no others see. but certainly yeah, a fair portion. i would say that there's a part of me that’s more creative than others, but i'm not imbued with genius. prince who just died taught himself to play 8 instruments. that’s a level of genius that few have.  : both. but, i’m able to get focused pretty easily and i think definitely this younger generation that you’re in, the millennials are very distracted. um, there’s a time when to sit and listen to your inner monologue and daydream and i think that’s a good distraction - when you’re thinking. bad distracted is juggling social media with texting 5 people at once with menial tasks – that’s a different kind of distracted that’s not as good. but, if you can be fully engaged with something by using your brain, that’s a good distracted. i would say that i do experience both levels of distraction, but there are times when i know i need to focus and i’m pretty apt at doing that. 
 : probably average.  : no : i think it’s both. : yeah, if i get involved in discussion, i can get there. i’m pretty pragmatic and um and, you know, utilitarian and functional in what i’m doing unless i’m bored and thinking in what i want to do next or engaged in conversation. but i’m not walking around all day and thinking what is it cy i can do right now. i am a husband, father, and employee at a corporation so i have a daily agenda but i would say i’ve always been a rule breaker so i do think of ways – why are we doing that? i think of creative solutions but not always “sky's the limit creative thoughts”. : no.  : no.  : no.
 : i would say it’s a couple things. i think creativity defines us in some significant ways, because it’s easy to be a drone. it’s easy to be a – the owners of studio 54, a night club in ny city, was very hot in 76, 77, 78 the disco area. the owner would stand out front and pick people to come in. it didn’t matter (race, what they’re wearing, gender) – people who would make the club exciting and people who wouldn't make it exciting (i.e., the “gray people” ). it could be all ages – a granny that had something special – or a young guy who didn’t have much. i’m not that cynical (those people are the gray people or the drones, but to have a fulfilling life, people need to be creative and creative outlets if you carry them out, you can have more enjoyable experiences in your life and more fulfilling relationships with others, so if you’re checking p=boxes or others are checking boxes you can’t have more fulfilling deeper relationship with others. it’s fun to stand out – it’s fun to have people say that’s funny or that's a really good idea or i didn’t think of that.  : sure. : yup.  : alright : okay. : good question. um... i mean i don’t know, i can't really think of anything in particular. um, i guess, well you know this pops in my mind is: i, um, got accepted for this fellowship after i finished my masters and i was able to go to, uh, [territory 1] and do some cancer research there for six months so it was, uh, i don’t know - i kind of felt honored that i got selected out of all the different applicants around the [country 1] to, to go be a fellow there. it was only me and myself who, who were selected. : me and one other person. so, there's two fellows, yeah. : yeah. thank you. : um, i think part of it - my persistence, um, i think that’s in terms of, uh, just overall in everything that i do. i'm very, i’m very much persistent if i – if there's something i want like try my best to do whatever i can to get – to reach that goal so i'll, you know, for example, for that fellowship you know i worked hard in school, i made sure i reached out to my professors so they could write me good letters of recommendation and just like really - and also doing a lot of my own research to find this - that fellowship to begin with cause it's not something that was like openly "here's a fellowship, if you want to apply for it". it was like literally went on the computer did my own research and found out about it and then previous to that i even like - summers before that i've actually applied for other internships and i've got them and i've - i went to like [city 1] for a summer, like - so i'm always very much proactive and i very much like to look for things on my own and even though these are things that are not like presented to me so – it's some kind of - and since i'm persistent in that if i want something i try my best to try to get it and - : thank you.  : um... hardest obstacle... i don't know, i guess... i don't know –laughs- let's see, i guess, one obstacle that - i mean there has been multiple ones, but one i can think of is, um, actually during my time when i did an internship in [city 1] it was an internship for minorities and that's how it was presented. and when i got there it was majority african american. it was myself and one other person who was hispanic in the program and i - that was the first i actually faced a lot of in a sense racism on the other side because they were very like, very - not a lot of people were very inclusive about me - of who i was because they felt i was taking a place of somebody else who was african american who should've been accepted in that program, rather than myself, so it was very challenging. it was - i was there for, for twelve weeks and so and we were all like spread out into different internships and the other girl who was hispanic, she actually got sent to baltimore to do her work so i was the only one left in [city 1], so it was like - i was able to get, like have two other people who were accepting of me because they weren't - they were  - both of them, they came from like – [state 1] - one was from [state 1] and one was from [state 2] so they had friends – they were more open to like people who were other ethnicities. but everybody else was like, they were very rude to me they just didn’t want me to participate with anything or hang out with them at all so it was like - that was for me a huge, like, cultural shock. a huge difference for me, so, and i very much, like i was very open like i was trying to be friendly trying to talk to them and they were just like - a lot of them were very like, just didn’t want anything to do with me. so, that was a very, very challenging summer and it was even to the point that i like, at days i was just like, "maybe i should just go back home", but i just - at the same time i didn’t want to let them determine or effect my experience during like the internship so that was something that was very challenging for me to be on, i guess, on that other side feeling that kind of racism against me. it was kind of like the first time i've ever had that experience. : -laughs- -inaudible, 6:05-  : yeah, part of it i wanted - i was - i really wanted that experience of being able to, to see and do my - the internship, so for me it was more like i'm just going to focus on the work that i have to do, go to work, and again i got lucky that there was the two other individuals who were friendly with me and were willing to like hang out with me and stuff, so at least i kind of like just stuck with them and, and hung out with them because it just felt like - i mean i had, i had - in order for me to like continue my time there i even had to like ask permission to like switch dorms 'cause i was in a dorm room with one other girl who like she refused to even talk to me. like i'm like living in the dorm with her and i'm trying to be nice and she didn’t want to have anything to do with me. so, i was just like - i had to ask permission and were able to switch us around. i was able to room with one of the girls who was like nice to me because i was just like i can't, i can't continue living for the rest of the summer in this situation where someone who doesn’t even want to like acknowledge that i'm in the room, so. : yeah -laughs- : -laughs- : um, an event? yes. i actually, um, my undergrad i majored in biology and my intentions were to be a doctor, that’s what i wanted to do, and, um, i - as i was going through the,  doing all my classes and stuff i realized like i have a hard time memorizing things, and being a doctor might not the best thing for me because i don’t want to end up, you know, not remembering something and then diagnose a patient wrongly. -laughs- so, i was just like maybe being a doctor is not the right thing for me. and, um, actually, uh, first semester of my, um, junior year, um, we had like things called biology seminars and they'd bring different people to come in and speak. and i actually went to one and one of the presenters, she came in and she talked about public health. i never knew anything about public health before that. it was not something i was aware of. and, so, she started - she presented about it i was kind of like, a little like in my head, i was like, "oh, that’s something that maybe i, you know, might be interested in". so, after that that’s when i did a lot of research, i looked more into it and i i was like, this is something that i think i could still be continuing in the public – i mean the health field but not necessarily be a doctor and actually treating patients. but i can actually help like communities as a whole and doing projects in that sense. so, that was kind of like the major event that kind of like switched things for me and made me to do more. like i said that’s how i actually ended up finding that fellowship – i mean the internship to go to [organization 1] that summer afterwards. because i was just like i want to get more experience and learn more about public health and afterwards i ended up going to get my masters in it. : um, i think it was just like - i mean her presentation as a whole. like she was just talking about like what is public health and the thing - what she was working in the field and she was doing more like epidemiology and actually doing that kind of stuff and i was just like, that’s kind of really interesting that just sounds like fun because at that point in my life i was kind of stressing out because i was like okay, i know i can't be a doctor and i also, but also i don’t want to sit in a lab all day and just be running test after test with my degree and i didn’t really know what else i could do as a biology major. because most people go the route afterwards to go med school or they were going to work in a lab and i was just like i don’t know what to do. so, i think after i heard about, you know, what she does, i was like "that sounds like something i could do and it's still working in the health field" so i think that was what kind of like triggered me to like go do more research on my own and go that route. : try to find internships. i think that’s really great. tt’s a nice way to kind of get your feet wet in different areas especially with public health being so broad there's so many ways you can go with public health. so, i feel like that's like a nice way for you to like figure out what's something your more interested in. whether it be doing epidemiology or working with - in the, you know, with working in communities or even doing environmental health. there's like so many venues so i feel like doing different internships and things that might interest you is the best for you to figure out what you want to do with that field. : um, i mean in terms of... i mean in terms of like, you know my work direction not necessarily. i just feel like overall i'm that type of person if you say "you can't do it" i'm going to try to prove you wrong, i guess. um, i mean i can even - i remember even as early as, um, in um, going into high school. um i went - i was in a private school and so, in order to start high school, you had to do a summer school program between - from 8th to 9th grade. you had to do summer school before you can go in. you had to take english and math and that was how they determined whether you got into an honors course or not. and, um, my english summer school teacher, she was just like - i really was determined, i wanted to be in english honors and she said, "no you shouldn’t be", but she's like "you're at that cusp where you can or you can't, it's up to you what you want to do" but she's like she goes, "but i don’t think you should", she goes "because if you do, you're – it's going to be really challenging" and so it got me really upset so i decided i'm going to go into honors and i did and i ended up taking ap literature and ap language and i did pretty good i got 3s on my exams. so, i feel like it's, i mean it's not a 4 or a 5, but it's still not, you know, i didn’t get a one which she was kind of like saying that i would do poorly in english so  : i feel like overall that’s kind of like how i kind of go through my life as i feel like if people tell me you can't do it, i try my best to prove them otherwise. i don’t take - i know some people, like they're told that they're just like okay i'm not going to do it, but for me it’s the opposite. i see it as a challenge\ : \ cause i want to prove people wrong. : uh, i mean, i guess. -laughs- i mean in that sense, yeah. i tend to, like i said, like i try to go the other way, i try to like, i don’t like if people say one thing, i try - i'm like well okay. what about this? or if people say i can't do something, i go the other route. i just - i don’t know. for me, it's more like i don’t - if i feel like something is right for me or if i, if i want to do something and people tell me "no", i kind of be like "okay, but i'm still going to do it in anyway" so –laughs- : um... i mean i guess. i kinda - i, i mean, right now, i'm a trainer for a program and i really like doing that and in my family we have like a history of teachers. both my parents are teachers, my dad's whole - like his, his - my grandma and my grandfather, they were teachers. like in our family, like it's kind of like, teaching is kind of like part of, i guess, you know, my family. and so, like i do like teaching others, um, i've never been a mentor to anybody but it's not something that i’m like totally against. but, um, but yeah, i mean i like teaching others. although i do have – like there's sometimes i feel like i might not be the greatest teacher because i feel like sometimes there are things that like unless - i’m the type of person, like if i don’t know how to do it 100% right or like i know everything i don’t want to like teach because i feel like i might miss something. i might not show - like tell somebody the right way so i'd rather like know the material 100% then i'm willing to be a teacher and if i don’t know it 100%, then i'm kind of like, "eh, i don’t know if i'm the best person". that’s how like i look at it. : um, difference? : yeah, um, it's kind of hard because in my field there's a lot more women than male. -laughs- : yeah, there's not that many males\ : -laughs- \because even when i do my masters i think there was like, in our classrooms, maybe like three guys for seventeen, eighteen females. so, and most of them were doctors already, so they were, you know, going to get their public health degree because they wanted to have that –inaudible, 15:34-\ : yeah, so, um, and even where i work right now there's no males who work directly with me so we're all females –laughs- so it's kind of hard like to say  : -laughs- sorry! : um... i don’t know. i mean... trying to think like what's - i guess just being able to, uh, i mean being able to like work with people and, you know, being able to talk to them but at the same time not  -make sure that you don’t get too – like share too much, because then, sometimes that like kind of affects, um, like your relationship with like a client or something for example. like if they know too much about you then - sometimes it could be good because sometimes they'll be more willing to talk to you but at other times, they could try to use that against you. so, sometimes i think it's better to not share – to not overshare. like, you know, maybe share enough to – so you can have a conversation with them if you feel like you need to like relate on some level but not like overshare too much that they think you're, uh, best friends when you, you know, you can't really have that type of relationship. : mhm. yeah there's definitely. i mean there's definitely, uh, one person in particular. um, she's, um, she's a professor at [university 1] actually but she works with, um – i work very closely with her 'cause she's actually the developer for the project [project 1], which is the program that i'm a trainer for. it’s an intervention that's hiv-based intervention that’s, um, used nationwide. but, um, she – like i can talk to her and she's been such a great, um, like a mentor to me. because, you know, i would be able to go to her and kind of like share how i'm feeling about maybe my work, like how things were going on at work or even personal life or even like where i see myself in the future. and she's always just been there to like kind of be that, you know, listen to me but also give advice. and to like what, you know, what i should maybe do or what i should look into. so, i consider her as kind of like my mentor. : um, both my parents are very determined people. they, um - and they're also very involved in a lot of different things and so i think, um - and even growing up they, they never, they were never the type who were like, "you have to do this" or "you have to do that". they're always very much, you know, if, you know, one day we were like, "oh we want to be a doctor", "alright that's good". if i want to be this it was never like "you have to be this, you have to be that". i think partially my parents were like that because both their parents were very much - like my dad, his dad insisted he must be a doctor. my mom's mom insisted that she had to be an engineer, so they both actually started college for those degrees and they hated it. they hated their experience and they ended up changing their degrees and doing something totally different. but i think because they both had that kind of experience growing up while they were raising me and my sisters, if was very much like whatever you want to do, um, know we support you. but at the same time, they were like whatever - in school, you know, you have to do good. you can't just, you know. we weren't really allowed to get away with getting c's. like that was just like, okay there's something going on you need to study more or - so they were always there pushing us, you know, to do good in school, so that we can have good grades, so that we can then go to college. it was always - it was also like a given that we were gonna go to college. they would like us to get a master's degree, it wasn't like - that wasn't like uh a must. but, uh, going to college was like a must. we had to go to college. and, um, i think also just overall, like kinda – like how i mentioned in the beginning, my parents always have been super involved in different things and so i think that’s also kinda been a motivator for me to like - i want to be involved i want to be active i want not just sit on the side and do nothing because i've always seen them involved in stuff. so, that’s kind of been like something that's kind of motivated me, as well. : uh, i don't know. i like, like - when i was younger i used to like to read a lot. read, um, you know, play with my sisters, ride my bike. i used to love riding my bike all of the time.  : mostly my sisters. : two. yeah, they're twins. they're younger, yeah. : yes. : -laughs- uh, two years – like two and a half years younger.  : um, i mean it was fun. i mean it's still fun. there's moments though that like - not now, but when i was younger, sometimes there'd be moments when they would gang up against me or like one of them wanted to like, you know, like, oh, like i - she wanted to like - one of them would want to attach to me and we would gang up on the other one –laughs-. so, there'd be moments where we would like, you know, kind of like rotate. but we've always been like really close and even to this day, like we're really close with each other. and i think, i think partly, um, another reason why we're really close is, um, i grew up in [state 3] and, um, we didn’t have any extended family there. it was just us, it was just the five of us growing up. and even my parents would always say too, like, you know, if we were fighting, they were like "okay you can fight, but at the end of the day you have each other. and you guys only have each other so you need to like rely on each other and you need to like be friends again" because, you know, you don’t want to like - like my parents would always say, like "once we're gone its only you three, like you can't – like don’t fight, don't hate each other. because this is, you know, this is your support system here. like you can't – like, you know, don’t be mad forever" or you know, kind of a thing. so, it was always just – like we were always, kind of a grew up that way. like everyone was super tight knit. like not my whole family, we're really close. like even other people will say "oh, you and your family are really close". like we'll go to disneyland together and people will make fun of that because like we're already like older adults and we're still like having fun as a family together and like, we do a lot of things together when possible. because my parents still live in [state 3], i'm here, and my sisters are all over the place but whenever we do get together, it's - we make sure we take time, take that time to spend together. : -laughs- : yeah, of course.  : yes. : no problem. : mhm. oh, definitely.  : oh, no. definitely. i have my – i have, um - i think it also kind of coincides with my workload but then i also do find myself also where there's times where i - it's probably kind of really bad, but there'll be days, you know, i come into work one day and i'm just like. i find myself doing other things and before i know it, i'm like "oh gosh, the whole day just went and i didn’t really do any work". but then there'll be a day i come in and i'm like, literally from the moment i come in to like, sometimes i even stay later because i'm just like boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. like just doing like a bunch of work, like i just find myself like in the zone, i’m just like oh. and before i know it, i'm like "oh, it's already six o'clock i guess i better leave" -laughs- : so, so, yeah. i do have – i do, i mean, aside from – like i said, sometimes there's moments like my work flow just kind of happens that way, you know. like there's a lot of things to do and not a lot of things to do but there are days when i should be doing work and i find myself not doing it, yeah. : um, i mean, i think its random. but there's moments though when i know, like for example, i think for me like i - again probably bad, but like when i know there's like a deadline\ : \like those are like it's kind of like a trigger for me, like oh, i really need to get myself together and actually like do what i need to do and that’s kind of when i'm on the go, when i know like, oh, it's not really due 'til like two weeks from now, like i tend to - i'm, i guess, in a sense, a procrastinator. like i kind of like wait until the last minute and that’s - but i find myself, i mean even though i do that, like i still feel like i - whatever i finish it’s a good product and it's not like i, i don't do things half-assed. but i do also tend to wait to the last minute to do things. -laughs- : um, probably like five hours. four to five hours i would say, but actually like sitting there and really doing good work, yeah. -laughs- : um, i mean i like to watch tv. it's kind of bad i watch a lot, too many shows probably. but i like, yeah, i like to watch tv or go to the movies or hanging out with friends. um, i probably think the balance is about even of how much work and free time i do so.   : i would probably be at the other end where like not as many products. : yeah, i think that’s mostly it. like i run out of ideas or i just don't, i get to the point where i'm just like well i can't think of anything else and i think this is good enough, so that's kind of like so i just leave it at that. : sorry how much do i feel i need to? : oh, urge. : um, not that much. yeah, i mean i tend to like, i'll look at it a couple times but i think personally, i’m just like okay. after i look at it a couple times, i'm like, i think it's good. i don't really feel the urge to like constantly be changing it and doing things over and over again, yeah. : hm,  i would say about the same amount, yeah. : i think i would say probably a little bit more time than others. i do, and, uh, i'm actually just thinking of last week, an incident where, uh, we're creating like this training right now and we kind of like split up amongst three of us, like we do some different power points and i - and we talked about like aside from the power points, like kind of like maybe write like a script of what would be said with the power points. and i kind of went in comparison with everybody else, i feel like i kind of went a little bit too over and beyond because i made this really nice like sheet with like what the script would be, and even kind of like step-by-step, what you would do, and i created that. and everybody else was like on their powerpoint slides and have the little comments underneath the powerpoint slides.  : i'm like, oh, here's my slides and here's my script and everybody else is just like oh well here's my slides. i mean i guess in that incidence, people are like "okay, you just made us, made us all look bad". for me, like it just kind of made sense. like okay, if we're gonna have the script with it, the powerpoint slides are up. you don’t see the script on it. so, somebody's going to need to see like the script on a different piece of paper. so, that’s where my mind went. i was like well you need to have like two different pieces, you can't just have the script on the powerpoint slides because when you're doing the presentation like the script is not on there for the person. so, yeah. i mean, i don't know, that's just like something. so yeah, i would say i probably spend more time doing, you know, doing something than other people in my field, yeah. : yeah, yeah. : uh... : i don’t know, i mean, i feel like when i think i spend a lot of time like thinking about stuff and i mean, for lack of a better a term, i guess i'll like daydream in a sense. like i'm sitting somewhere and i start thinking about stuff, and i'm like "oh, this and that". like, so, i don’t know if in doing that, i find myself - maybe it's unconsciously, like i'm putting ideas together or even, you know, my thoughts. and so sometimes i'll, you know, i'll be at work or wherever the incidence. i'm doing something and i'm like, something kind of comes up and i'm like "oh, that sounds familiar. was i thinking about that before or not?" so, i don’t know if it's just its more just like unconsciously i'm like putting these things together in my mind and then whenever i need to do work on that- whatever it is in particular it kind of like comes back again so. : the distractible. -laughs- : yeah, like i'm very much - like i find myself, like my mind is wandering and it's like sometimes it can be bad, too. 'cause i remember even like in classes, like i'll be in class trying to focus and the next thing i know, i'm like thinking about something else and i'm like, "oh, shoot i just totally missed what's going on". and so, i tend - i'm very dis – i’m very like, in that sense, i'm not focused at all. i find myself, like i'm wandering, i’m thinking about other stuff. i can be like in a conversation and i'm like talking with somebody and then i'm like listening over here at what's going on, but at the same time i'm thinking about something. and then i come back and i'm like "oh, shoot. what did they just say?" like, so, yeah. i find myself like kind of like all over the place.  : i don't think people would say\ : i would say different than that because i'm not like, not to the point where like i'm totally lost, you know, like i can still, in a sense, kind of focus on what's going on. (knocks on door) but my mind is traveling a lot so, so, i mean maybe i'm a little bit of both because i wouldn’t say people would think that i’m like totally gone or not even paying attention so.  : yeah. : i think there's some stuff i can retain and there's things like, you know, i can you know remember and there's other things i can't. i don't - and i don’t know - i couldn’t tell you what are the things i can remember or what are the things i can't, but there are things that like, like even like, i don't know why, sometimes something will pop up and i'm like "oh, yeah, that’s blah blah blah" and people will be like "what does she think - how did you remember that?" and i was like, "oh, i remember taking something, you know, a while ago". but then there's other things that, you know, i just can't remember. and i'm very much so like, you know, even like, as i was doing my biology degree there was things that like i remember reading it and stuff like that and then it gets to the test. and i'm like, i remember reading it i just can't remember what it was\ :  \and i couldn’t put it like, you know, from like - i couldn’t write it down to answer the question. 'cause i was like i remember that, but i couldn't tell you –laughs- like what it is. so, like, so just that in itself it was kind of like, uh, this is a really, this is really like a bad, you know - like i guess this just shows i shouldn’t be a doctor -laughs- like if i can't remember like something in the moment. i can't be helping other people, -laughs- so, yeah. : i don’t think so. : mhm.  : yeah, i don’t think i would be. yeah, no. : no. : mhm. : um.  : i think, i mean the only thing i can think of that is somewhat different is, you know, now that i've been at my current job for like four years, i'm much more comfortable and so i know like how to do things. i think in the beginning i was very much like, trying to like follow all the order and follow all the rules and do everything i had to do and ask a lot of questions, and now that i'm like - i feel a lot more comfortable, i don't like - i kind of like make decisions on my own, i'll just do things. and then, you know, i'll be like "oh, this is what it is. is this fine?" and i keep moving on rather than before i like i felt i would ask a lot more questions, like "what about this" and "what about that" and "what about this". like, you know, just to make sure i was doing things right. so, now that i'm more comfortable in what i'm doing i don’t ask as many questions and i kind of just do things on my own and kind of take that kind of initiative. : um... i don’t think so. i think it's kind of like stayed the same.  : yeah. : hm. trying to think... i think, i think i pretty much covered everything. : okay. : somebody's, um, whatever comes to my mind is schizophrenic let’s say\ : can you just watch him and say if he is ill or not?  : without interviewing?  : no. okay, so by just by in person impossible to say?  : okay.  : oh.  : uh huh.   : oh okay. : oh, okay, okay. mhm.  : okay but really but without talking and you –– one cannot say?  : okay, i have another question. can a person hide his illness? for example during an interview\ : oh, really? : oh, okay.  : oh, okay, interesting.  : yeah, yeah, yeah.  : oh, really?  : oh. : oh, they even might not realize?  : interesting. okay, thank you so much. : oh, interesting, yeah. so, sorry to question you. but ju –– i am from natural science and this kind of new area for me. so it's all very interesting. : oh, that's\  : oh, in mainly [country 2], but\ : \i traveled a lot since then. so, i'm a long time here i have been here sixteen years in states before three years in [city 1]and before i spent some time in [country 3]and [country 4]. so. : well, i have to talk here.  : you cannot get the of accent : i was born in [city 2]so\  : yeah but, uh, half of education there and then in [country 5]. but i, somehow i came across, um, a long time ago, actually, i came across a story about, um, there was a great russian novelist nobokov here he’s known mostly by his novel that is less popular in, in [country 2]and [region 1]. : lolita, right. -laughs- but, but he wrote lots of other good things. so, and then, i totally incidentally came across interesting fact of him that he never gave a single interview. : either recorded or not. : because he had such a strong accent and he had a complex about it, but he wrote, most of his novels were written in european languages, not in russian and he knew them better than russian in fact because he got educated in the gymnasium that was headed by his dad. it was the most famous gymnasium in saint petersburg. so, and, uh, after reading it i decided to stop working on my accent -laughs- and so only nicole kidman can do it. but i\ : okay.  : okay, yes.  : uh huh.  : okay.  : i’m, normally do science. : so, it means you, have some goal in mind\ : \but then you do experiments, you produce some data and then you have interpret them. and that’s the most exciting thing actually, to interpret what you expect to find and what you really found and then do either some correction or refining or, and i had a couple of times…i really came to a situation that it contradicts to everything. so we have this set of spectro pictures of whatever, whatever you got from your experiment and you cannot put them together. and it sometimes it took, in one case it took a couple of years until i accidentally came into library and i never seen this translated [language 1] journals, physic journals, into english and it was, you might not believe, but i really like was walking in the library in the shelves. and like i saw this translated journal and i took one and i found out one very old articles from 1958, i believe, from one of my former advisors, who is probably already a very old person, and like i just opened the journal and found this article, uh, without searching for it\  : \and there was something that was very close to what we were doing. : so, i came back, emailed him, i have something from end of 50s and he told me no it’s still the same, gave me new references, and of course i checked, and then the next day we figure out how to put all the pieces together. but, uh, so it's, that’s what uh really interesting. but lately i do engineering, which is less interesting. : because, because you, all the tasks are defined, all the parameters are defined and it brings you your salary more money, but, but you know from the beginning you can build this thing. so, in science, you do not know actually. you try and search and see, but, but in engineering, so last two years, i do this engineering things and i, less happy, i, my salary is more than in science but my internal satisfaction is less happy.  : area? : oh, really? like? interviewer: yeah, for your whole career. : the whole career. it would be, of course, um- well, that’s another thing. if you want to obtain, nowadays, if you want to obtain a new piece of information, you really cannot, most of the time, you cannot do it with commercial available things. so, you have to, so, and i’m not sure about your area of science, right. in physics, if an idea comes and you publish it, you don’t do it, somebody will do it in half a year for sure.  : competition is really, really very tight. but to do it-it’s almost impossible to do it with ordinary commercial devices. : so, you have to build it yourself, so it means you have to do some engineering work. first, you build it. some kind of like, uh, apparatus that can measure your things, and then you do measurements and then you think, how would you do with them? and -clears throat- so, in my case, it's in fact, maybe 35 to 65% around this, so 35% you spend your time building all of these things that you cannot buy. : and, uh, like they are all in house built like with sometimes your parts sometimes hundred years old parts, but eventually. so, it’s less pleasant work because you understand it’s a waste of time in certain way, but you have no other choice as to do it until you, otherwise you will not come to your goal, right? but then, when you build this thing it’s supposed to work and be stable at least for some time. then, you make your measurements and then, and then here is the most exciting part. so, you have some new information that nobody has obtained before and you-because it’s new, in most of the cases you cannot read immediately in the textbooks how to handle it. so, you have to think and produce some new ideas and that’s most interesting, most rewarding, and i had a couple like situations like that in life where it was really first very unclear how to solve it, but eventually we did it. : was it the question? or was i talking about something else?       : oh, more detailed? : oh. there is no single one : but probably two. : so, one was refining of this experimental facilities to, to, to obtain information that-was not able, wasn’t possible to obtain before, uh, more exactly it’s detection of a signal from, from such a small amount of material that is on the surface of any iron containing substance, which is equivalent of 10% of a single atomic layer of iron on the surface.  : so, this iron might be actually near surface layer, but the amount of items iron atoms such, that if you put them on the very top surface, they will only be 10% and we were able to build a technique that actually detects it very reliably. : and you can see in which chemical state iron is like, is it oxide hydroxide, like whatever it’s like metallic iron, um, it means you have to do really nice statistical quality of the data, um, there are certain criterion, which normally people use in high energy physics for this particle accelerators which is to receive one. like if you have background and you have your effect, you have error bar so it should be three sigma means, stigma comes from\ : yeah, standard deviation drive, but for simplicity, they don’t put on every point like gaussian distribution. they just put error bar which is sigma, so it should be three sigmas above the background, uh, in super collider they have 6 sigmas\ : i believe they increase twice. but in our case it was close to six-somewhere between 3 and 6-but reliable data. this one thing and-and this is very affordable equipment. i mean you don’t have to go to europe and build super collider to do it. so we can use all these old parts, you know, recycle other parts of the equipment and, so-it’s stable it works for months and this one thing. second thing, um, so we used two different kinds of isotope: iron and nonmagnetic (nonmetal) isotope, metal but nonmagnetic, and suppose we do some temperature dependence and depends, uh, the parameter that we derive from experiments on iron behaves. let’s say, it increases, but when instead of iron, we do other uh material which is nonmagnetic and we expect to have the same dependence, but it behaves totally opposite and it decreases temperature or reduce with concentration. so completely opposite behavior, and-and for quite a time there was no even an idea how to feed them togetherbut then we understood that, uh, the assumptions that we use from the beginning and interpretation around, uh, because working with isotopes, people normally think it’s a point probe. so it means it collects information from the position of this isotope where it is placed in new material. but it turns out it’s actually not so, and it collects information from wider areas- like there’s first neighbors, there are second neighbor’s neighbors  third, fourth, and so on. only consideration of second nearest neighbors, now the first nearest neighbors already solves the problem\ : \because they contribution can be extremely large and normal people think the far away you from some central faulty measure is exponentially everything drops down, uh, but not exactly. so, if you start doing physics and watch carefully how it works, construct it, it turns out actually the more distant neighbors can give much 50% contribution, which is strong effect and then : yes, exactly! so, and this absolutely nontrivial thing, and in certain materials like we discussed today like when you-when one of your tests all of these errors, they point in one direction and another direction or one and one and none in the opposite : yes, but there is a case when everything point in different direction they call them frustrated magnets…frustrated spin glasses. so, then, all the magnets-there are many of them-and they look in different direction then on average position is zero because they all cancel each other. but if they are not so many of them on the-if they still look in different direction-but because there are not so many of them, they cannot cancel precisely. so they cancel some extent. but there is something else, and because contributions from second neighbors are huge, and actually the net effect can be quite big. but normally, it’s not in the textbooks because people always think like, uh, next small effects are so small that they shouldn’t consider it. but this is example of actually what you don’t do, exactly to the textbooks. but you go to physical thinking and then you understand actually when you’ve come to real physics, which is not obvious, not logical, not pure math, but it is how the world if constructed. you cannot predict from the beginning . then, you can fit all your experimental data in a nice piece and explain everything and this is most exciting  : what i think : agree? : agreeableness…okay : okay : more disagreeable, more creative? : now i know the secret : so, agreeable to absolutely everything? :  um i don’t remember really how it happened. is it because like historically, but in my experience, you actually don’t trust anything, almost not trust anything until it tells you in the lab  if you want to have a clean experiment, you go to tiny details. you check everything and then you can say your device is ready to produce correct significant data even, uh, but it might be just because there are so many cases when people think one thing, they measure some spectra and then it turns out there was obviously 60 hertz synchronized with something in position system and it gets component and then you think it’s a signal, but it’s just bad filtering. some-some-some like simple artifacts that people tend to interpret like as a really some interesting effects, uh, normally experimental scientists, they are very cautious about it. so and you have to really know how it works all the background so i think it’s more traditionally that for that branch of science you tend to really check yourself and then, uh, to trust somebody’s opinion that it works as it’s supposed to work according to the manual but, um, i know, maybe i was luck-but i had little through my career, science career, i actually had tough supervision and most of the-in most of the labs. um, you come once a week for the group meeting and then you do whatever you want. so you are supposed to tell and bring something but um for discussion but in most of the case there was no everyday supervision, so and most of my bosses like you can discuss and argue and, uh, this was actually kind of, uh, cannot say rude, but it was it was a normal thing like when people discuss something not necessarily have to say whatever your boss says and say yes, yes, yes, so but i was confined only to- to academic, uh, research, so, um, for example, i know in other countries, and i know this because i lived in [country 3] for some time, uh, students almost can almost cannot argue with the professors. so, it’s culturally very forbidden, though they are changing and there are new, young people and some of them openly like opposition themselves against the system, but when first time i came out of [country 2], whatever you call it-um-it was [country 3]. i found so much hierarchy and the most academic institution and you will not show it to them, right? -interviewer laughs-uh, it was more hierarchical system than the [country 2] army originally\ : \it was such a great subordination and from me, it was really hard. so for the first several months, i really was, i really felt i’m not the one in the but and even though they made some, so they understood them scientists and i-they didn’t apply all these rules to me. still, it was quite hard, even with those loose things. they gave it to me, but like one of my colleagues about the same age couldn’t leave the lab without-he was actually-it’s interesting story. he was a musician and a physicist at the same time, but he had to practice piano every day. he couldn’t just leave and tell the boss-okay i have to go play half and hour and come back during lunch-so pretend that he’s still here. he switch on the lamp, pencils on the desk, and like made a working environment. and then quickly on the bike and –makes driving sounds- home, practicing and go back, it was really funny and he was going it every day. but then i switched to another institute, and there was a guy who worked who played the same piano in a local bar and he used to come to very old [ethnicity 1] scientist who’s the head of lab and said i cannot work today because i have to play and he say but-which was like completely outrageous from that culture-but he couldn’t do anything, but eventually guy instead of working the night in the lab he was going and playing at the bar. so there are different people but, um, it was i totally agree it’s actually the environment, which is really hard for creativity and, um, when everyone just listens the head of lab, um\ :  \yes, but i was lucky, i mean, i was really lucky as i understand now : oh, they did.   : um, i mean, uh, going chronologically, it was very fun. so, when i was doing my thesis, a long time ago, in [country 3], uh, everything was so regulated. it was unbelievable. like you cannot do overwork. you cannot leave equipment working at night. you have update all the permission from fire department for everything, everything, everything! just to compare that-like i was working here-at [lab 1] lab at [university 1] campus. one of their building-they have a dome on the slope-that’s the division where i work, called, [center 1] it’s working nonstop for months. and if it stops, it’s really bad. if something gets burned there, they order it from another shore and it comes in less than 24 hours because like 12 demands 21:13 depending on that and experiments run at the same time, um, depend critically. so, and breakups do happen from time to time, but everything fix like really, very quickly. so, and if you want to work at night, you can work at night, at day, the more you work- the better for your data and science. so, in that system, it was totally opposite. so, if i wanted to stay-to get my experiment running nonstop and i had to do it to collect the data for one week, i have to obtain three signatures of the head lab of the chair of the division of the vice dean somebody else, and they have to be sure that i don’t break any laboring constitution rules. it means if i want to work such amount of time, i have to have so many people on the list who take the sheets and duh duh duh. normally you come these people and ask may i put you on the list, but really you will be sitting at home .so, but they say yeah, but they have to sign. so, you collect all of this and if you’re a grad student or like it’s really like and, like nobody can help you and you have to do it yourself. and you arrange it, and then i was doing all these vicious circles and at night um like of course you want to sleep at night. so you know it could be nice and no need to be there but you have to be there and duh duh duh and i was suffering and then there was a grad student in my lab who was already graduating and he told me, i have to do it. so, what, he showed me the ways. this was my first big lesson in life. so, we went to the back of the building and he showed me the fence, when he cut the top like the fence had the metal tubes, like with, you know, sharp endings, and which was next to the wall he cut one so we can climb very easily and then you have your own keys from the lab. you open it and then you take all the lamps from the equipment's from the front panels that shine, from, you know, press buttons and they shine, the buttons shine and so on. and you disassemble this button and screw out the indication lights. you assemble the button back where you cannot do it, you put the black pieces of paper so you can see from the outside. when the fireman circle around –laughs- and you run your experiment with all of these thing. the only thing that you have to do…, you come quickly before any engineer comes to lab so you can take all this black pieces out and in such a way i was able to do my data and results and everything  : and i got to sleep at home and very quickly and effectively and the only thing-when you climb to, probably three yards to the fence in winter time it’s slippery. so you have to be really cautious, but that’s the way, how you can do a phd like on your own : it’s really creative and you don’t have to collect signatures, in the states, unfortunately you cannot do it, because they can put you in prison for that. so you have to follow the rules, but it’s less bureaucratic at the same time, so you don’t have to- everyone happy when you work and don’t sleep. so it’s very different, but this was number one lesson. number two lesson was, um, i actually was really lucky with my science advisors and, uh, in particular, before i came here, i had a really nice advisor in, um, [university 2] university in [city 1]and, um, so he was really like (siren going off in background) he gave me lots of room for freedom for engineering freedom, uh, he, if i wanted to do something new, i didn’t have to prove, he was very open like okay, [participants name], you have something you want to try. you build it, show us. so, and, um, and it was really nice, because sometimes you have to explain why you need to do it, why how much it'll was cost, what it’ll take. so, it’s, um, but i was given freedom just do it and show us, if its better than what we have here in the lab or not, and it was really really nice. so i had certain freedom when in my engineering approaches,  and um,  and uhhhhh something else about that, yes and also they in [university 2]they were keeping all traditions from [famous person] who actually worked there any never knew it and did his experiments and he used, he had little uhh, little equipment that he could buy because at that time. [city 3] was kind of very distant place from london uh but but he built all of, most of his equipment for which he got nobel prizes by himself in the lab and then he, when experiment was done and they got the data they used to disassemble it uhh and then recycled all the parts screws etc. and you couldn't use them. so from all this 1905, [university 2] keeps this tradition, they don't throw away like mother [country 2], equipment doesn't go on the electronic garbage place like in [inaudible, 26:08] where i can maybe just buy from money buy a new one so there is special person who disassembles everything up to screw, has multiple boxes, put everything in these multiple boxes then if you come to him he gives you exactly what you need, all these washers, nuts, and whatever you want. so its very interesting so um and then you play like a boy with the lego, you know constructor, you can play with it. so but what i'm saying time factor is very important. so you can have money but you have to apply for money, you have to wait for grant will come, you have to like, follow the necessary steps but if you have everything is uh in the next room bunch of small drawers, have room to play, you feel like a happy boy and do science, that’s what basically, that enormous freedom i was given, i created freedom and like used parts but everything used for whatever that i could do without less control. um, that would led us to to to to achievements that i mentioned in the very beginning, ten percent of single atomic layer on the surface, which you cannot do with any camera shot device and um i think it could be [inaudible, 27:25] but i'm trying to convey my, my thoughts. : and and and another example actually, also one of the good example was my boss at [university 3], who unfortunately moved to washington from there and the whole research group disappeared so i ended up in [city 4], but uh he was giving lectures, he was like, like, like as a university professors and i decided to attend it because i never had this particular subject studied and this was the best lectures i ever heard in my life. uhh it was really brilliantly presented and scientifically and how he did it and and um... and the speech and uhh it was totally amazing, and you, you attend it and you really really want to go and do some cool science so um i do not know exactly how to exactly convey it with words but its kinda you, you listen to somebody and you, he's inspired you to... to... to do more things in your area.  : im pretty sure  : hmmmmm, let me think a second. well in experimental science i think it’s a little hard for women because like you have to look at a lot, sometimes you have to carry like bottles with liquid nitrogen and nobody will carry inside for you right so its like 50 pounds. things for experiment, or like communicate with the machine shop people uhhh like i mean that’s what normally ladies want to do but, but there are some women in science and some of them um. some of them pretty successful in the same [lab 1] lab there was a young italian professor in physics department and um, eh she was really working really good, i mean really hard and she had really nice ideas so in the most bright um i know it probably there are many other people like but i'm talking because she was working next to me right. so i just know this story and she is one of the coolest and most prominent subjects in the whole modern physics , you can build a big accelerator 30:04 but there are some effects, in condensed by the body called mini particle effects where you know its consists of atoms and electrons but the collective behavior is such that it looks and you experiment like totally different particle was maybe integer charge of the electron and integer spin of the electron but it looks like a completely new particle, and all this new collective effects, they call them quasi particles, they're responsible for superconductivity and all this high temperature superconductivity, all this new effects right. and now its just, area that just starting, developing very rapidly and very little understood and you don't have to do such a great investments like for the supercolliders. so and this lady she worked right in this hot topic and so i can say that- what i can say-that, that woman and she and like i think you can spread to the rest of the women scientists, they tend more thinking than to do- first better thinking and more like a thorough thinking before they really start, so its more cautious approach but more thinked over approach i would say. so the man try to like immediately oh there is idea lets do something-they’re more like aggressively attacking it but they think with less thinking and women maybe because its historically considered like uh weaker creatures, they tried to compensate by better approaches, better thinking and um,  and, i mean umm, what was the question?  : that’s what i, no really because i  : yes in my first boss in united states actually was also a lady uh but she was doing too many, yes i understand now she had too many projects to do. and like the were we were twice larger research group than any research group in physics department on the floor and i think this is, but she had funds for that probably but um from my point of view it was like umm, and again i was given a great freedom by the way, nobody controlled me like i could do my experiments whatever i want but just report every week umm. but um,  i mean there are still some personality like because people different all women different too but as is generally i think there is a common tendency that, women try to think better in the beginning and do more cautious in detail, thorough approach on the problem than male researchers, but we'll see.  : oh cool! no no really : yes, i just remember how lets say magnetic material, co-linear, should produce such spectrum or spin-glass or super -muffles speech- spectrum or if its isolated magnetic semi-conductor should produce such spectrum and if i take any journal now and read any article, i immediately will be able to interpret like what they're talking about at all, but i'm not sure if that’s what you mean.  : thousands : over five thousands  : minutes, minutes  : at least minutes. because its not like single time you, you... at some point i actually had to, because there were so many of them and i had desk like you. smaller but very crowded, piled, so i had to put them together and glue on the walls, so my walls and office were like... almost spectra and i tried like pictures we did today in one of the experiments in x and y like the changes i tried to, but i need to see them all right? so like, i tried to see in this direction and that direction and produce some like tendencies?, if there were some tendencies or not, and and and and from first time you cannot do it so you watch them, then watch the next day next day next day next month and if your boss is not happy, you watch again and try to interpret in different way and discuss it and, and um, and um, and so on.  : but i still, but i'm not joking i really remember them all.  : oh yeah yeah yeah : ye- i'm absolutely sure you can you can, just my experience, you can read tons of textbooks and books and you can read them one week, another week, third week, and think and how to do it better and would you have to change in your equipment. but it doesn't help you really because when you eventually in the worst situation you can spend three months reading books and coming to some proposal and in no particular tiny details and then when you start doing first experiment you, ninety-five percent of cases you will find its something different, whether or not you expect it, not looking like you expect, working like you expect, so and then all this three months waste of time. why do you need to waste your time, you just do something simple see if its really going that way, and then if it is then you start changing to better parts or like, better, materials i do not know, to think how to increase it or do something better, but its really important to do like not from the beginning excellently ~41:26 step to the end, but in separate steps so you do something rough, quick and dirty and you see if it works, if it works you need to refine next step and next step and next step, and...   : um, actually i had a good example from my [people of country 3] experience. um, so its actually, its actually, it never occurred to me to think in new terms before, but um when you have a hierarchical structure, and don't show it to [people of country 3] please : so  : ok sure. so when you have, some of them now big people there, but there's still on the technical i mean technical side not creative side, that’s the thing. so they're basically directors of big facilities but it means building equipment and keeping them in shape but not producing data on them and whoever now produces the data are still foreigners, so. but anyway um, so there is a task right, given to boss, boss gives it to subordinates and everyone works on that, and i was like in this situation basically which, which was hard to me but because it was new of physics area, and it was learning something it was still interesting. and um we basically started some effect called quantum confinement right. : yes. from big material to small and then physical properties changes start behaving optically differently and very interesting things, and but we have to visualize these structures right, how you do it you take electron microscope and you apply your skills to produce nice pictures. so the group where i was working they were really electron microscopic group and they were building super duper electron microscope i've never seen before, like three story buildings with all shiny lines, beam lines, ion lines... for me like after coming from mother [country 2] it was like mars kay, it was really another planet. but it was all technical, it was all very non-creative in fact. just you know you can do it, if you have funds you can do it. and and the main interest was to produce these nice pictures that shows these tiny structures, but- to make the structures, you sometimes use equipment that mills them. you put some ions, and they do make your materials thinner, little by little, electrons from the microscope can go through and you can visualize your pictures, but i noticed that when you mill this material down for electron microscope use, the milling process actually changed the optical properties. and for me it was such an exciting thing, because it was basically changing the quantum confinement structures to smaller dimensions, together the same line while you making the sample ready for microscope use, you can actually change properties of this quantum confinement structures and for me it was like i remember at that time it was so exciting. like woo, we did it, like we really showed quantum confinement effects that work like depending on the size was correct like optical properties but for all my bosses it was nothing, they were completely not interested, they were like for them it was like i, i i i mean i knew we could do 1,2,3 papers in best physics journals but they, they had no need to report it, to publish all those papers, they already had the funds, they needed to produce photographs of the materials working and thats was the main reason i actually quit, and went back to mother [country 2]. after [country 3] because its completely completely not how [ people of country 2] academic system worked, soviet academic system worked. um, it was not rich at all, but it was much more creative, if you accidentally come to some interesting effect, people do study and try to see it. but uh so for me it was really really hard lesson in life, so i had to go back from rich country to developing country, but uh : i feel like a hardcore [person of country 2] still. -laugh-. especially talking about playing hockey which i didn't mention until with ~47:11 inaudible [laughter]. but anyways so that’s what i want to say like sometimes you unexpectedly come across something and uh, if you have uh creative things and you are not inhibited by um, mean by boss requirements or like your cultural system, that you still have to produce best picture possible. you can produce and report it but you see nice physics effects and you cannot switch it because its not in system um. i mean i would inhibit all the system and switch and study. and and and and eventually publish something of that but it was so much emotional things oh, it was just completely like i had to really um, i mean we still talked with the boss but it was like, on the edge of friction, but the same situation here when here or in [country 2] or [country 6] when [country 7], like i mean, i saw numerous times when students argue with professors but not in [country 3].  : oh yes thank you so much.   : actually i also had a really good example once um somehow it came out of my field of view but when you mentioned ladies in science and creativity so just a story. i had an older brother and he was um, he married a girl who was in, so he's a physicist as me right, but she was in institute like something that here in [city 4] you would call design institute, and she was specializing on shoes. but, and she was like, just it was like you know there is expression youre in the tracks, for example like um. i heard lecture from [individual 1], former department of financial secretary and he is a noble winner, professor at [university 4] , also physicist. when he won them he was director of the [lab 1] lab, and when i was still there he was making talks and he says like, 'i had like fifteen... uncles and aunts and they all have phds in science and for me there was no choice i had to go and do a phd in science that’s why i ended up at [university 4] and doing optical tweezers 49:41 got won nobel prize' do do do do do, so in [country 2] we call it like "you're are in the tracks", like you know when the big trucks go inside on the unpaved road they produce these deep things. and if you go after them you don't have to keep the steering wheel right so because tracks just like wherever the road goes and most of the roads in [country 2] are still unpaved right [laughter] so there is an inaudible 50:05 expression like you just go inside your track, so we don't have to whatever you are born and just follow the tracks set up for you. and she was doing kind of like that until i think now she really got hooked with my brother and then she became more proactive, creative, she switched from making shoes to dresses and uh, and and i think her example is basically whatever you mentioned here all points. ladies, inhibition, uhh, whatever you asked me before. they all count in one creative personality case and now eventually my brother got work in [city 5] as a biochemist and they moved there. so and um they already have many designers so you cannot do shoes, be successful with shoes and dresses so they switch to something completely different but that really so exciting and i am just completely, completely so like excited really about it and uh, you can go online and check it. so they they start hiking in the countryside in [country 8] and they found there are old stones in the middle of nowhere, they call them runic stones, and you can clean them and there are some runic like very nice pictures and they found bunch of these stones, cut-made a catalogue, cleaned them, and she was taking this oh patterns and bringing them in colors on the silk. it’s a such a cool piece of art. so you can go online and uh google [concept] or [website] and her name is [relative] and you'll see what i mean. so a person did shoes, dresses, and now runic stones for some stable arts like- so you can apply all this, all principles you mentioned into one person, not apply but to see in one person and and and because it was done mostly in the apartment, in next to me and i was witnessing it probably made a imprint unconscious so i never i never thought in terms of inhibition or something or something else but : perfect, alright. : thanks for having me. : yeah, yeah. : i did yeah, [name of another study]... was it three years ago, four years ago? : it was a while ago. -laughs- : oh wow. : yeah. : i just\ : you know, i did another, i did a follow up study on phenotyping i think\ : \and i was scanned for that. so, uh, i'm not sure if that was rela –– was that a related thing that you did? : no, it was an mri. : oh wow, wow cool. : yeah. : yeah, that's insane. : cool. : yeah. : right, okay. : okay. : yeah. : oh no, you didn't. you didn't in the follow up but not on that so. : okay. : i work primarily in the entertainment industry, kind of all over the place –laughs- uh, i started as a writer... uh, and did that for a long time and then i sort of burnt out and started acting so i, i write, act, direct, edit. : wear a lot of hats. um, i've been enjoying acting a lot more than the others\ : \but you know, that changes in shifts.  : if you get something where you really are enjoying doing it, it, it, you know, your priorities can change on a dime. : yeah. : oh, uh... you know, i just, i wrote a feature film when i was um, in my early twenties, probably twenty-two, and after i'm guessing four hundred drafts, it finally was made last year, and uh it'll be coming out, it's going to do the festival thing this upcoming year and it'll probably come out the following year. so, twenty-some years later, to see something come alive, uhh... with the heart of it being significantly the same, you know, it was kinda –– that's kind of, i was sort of proud of that. -laughs- : yeah, yeah. : yeah. : um, i think, i do think that there, there, there's a level of persistence and tenacity and, and being able to sort of take a step back from what you've done, you might need a little time to do that, but, take a step back, and, and then reassess, and, and change, and change substantially sometimes and then sometimes it's just like little tweaks and fixes –– just sort of an attention to detail and, and, and, and a fearlessness at, at kind of um... well they call it killing your babies –laughs- a lot of times, you know like whatever you might be uh really invested in, being able to completely destroy that, and then build it uh... i think that's allowed me to kind of do four hundred drafts and, not just on that project, but on a lot of projects, being able to kinda really uh, uh, um... on the other hand, i also don't give things up. so as much as i might like go, "oh, that didn't work here," i also, i'm like a creative hoarder. : and i save it all. and i re, i cannibalize it and reuse it in other ways and in other places, that sort of thing, so. : um, yeah, i used to use you know, i used to, when i was young, i, you know, didn't quite journal, but i would write thoughts down, and just, just little things and i would you know, as i was writing i would sometimes uh, if a line of dialogue or something popped into my head, i would just write it in a notebook. and then i'd sort of stop doing that as computers became a little more portable. : -laughs- so, uh, so yeah i kind of, i'll write notes either on my phone, or on my i don't know computer, or um... and then i just go back through things and go, "oh yeah, i didn't use that" and i'll just pull it –– i'll just, you know, copy paste, and put it into another thing, and then you know, notate, uhh, you know maybe what the scene was called or if it's just sort of a part of a scene or something like that, and then i just kind of file those things in my own sort of filing system –laughs-  : i can be both detail-oriented and also things can kind of just i –– just i know where they're at, kind of a thing, where you know i know how to access them, so, yeah. : um... the big picture's just always there like once you sort of have that, that... you know when you, when the, when the kernel of the idea comes and it's just sorta gestating in your brain for a while and then, then there's that moment of like "oh, that's what this idea is, or supposed to be" and it can change and things move around or whatever, but once you have that big picture idea, the details are just in service to that, it's always there, you're just sort of, you're just, you know, being um, uh... focused on the task at hand to serve that bigger picture. you know, you're not um... you're not getting lost in the details, nor do you, ah... and i'm not explaining how that works –laughs- but i'm just, you know, i guess that you can get consumed by the big picture, overwhelmed by the idea, but you, but if you just kind of compartmentalize, well i need to work on this scene today, or do this thing today, or do this thing right now, or this thing in the moment, it just, you're just, you're focused on the task at hand and you're able to get through and then you're able to see, "oh okay, now it's coming together." and then eventually, you have something, you know. twenty-some years later. : yeah, yeah. : yeah. : real quick, i'm sorry –sound of zipper- would you like some, i have some? : you know there, it, there're different kinds of obstacles, the day-to-day, in this particular business, is obviously dealing with a lot of rejection –zipper- um... and that you just kind of, i mean or not that it can't be demoralizing 'cause it certainly can be, but you just... you get up the next day and you go "well, what else am i gonna do?" you know? there's sort of a –laughs- there's sort of a sisyphus element to it, you do feel like you're pushing a rock up a hill. : um, and then in the nitty gritty, sometimes especially in, you know unfortunately in my industry creativity is not really encouraged.  : you would think it would be, but it's not, and it's um... which is, i mean, if you look at most of television and film, you can see that. : um, and so... you know battling those windmills all the time, and battling that kind of like, the small-mindedness or narrowness of s –– of vision of people that you work with, or... you know? -both laugh- i'm sure you do. : um, i don’t...hmm, how do i cope with it. well... i take on too much to do myself, so that i –– like i said, not only do i wear a lot of hats, within, within that, i do, i do too much, and i don't, you know, sometimes i like micromanage you not only the project but myself. : uh but it's... that's how i sort of deal with the, the uh the the the, the job itself, but dealing with the coping, uh i, i have to do things that are not, that are not, creative in that way, or that are not uh, i mean a lot of physical things i like to do. uh, things that don't use your brain in that way, you know like so you can take a break from it and uh, and walk away from it sometimes. um, um... i don't know. i don't know if that answered your question. -laughs- : yeah. : um... uh, people that i directly know or work with, or more sort of\ : ok, uh\ : uh, the sort of maverick spirit of uh, of [artist 1] well.. you know, he was a prodigy. uh and he... blew it. -laughs- 'cause he was uh, he, he, again he, the industry uh doesn't foster or encourage creativity and he was an infinitely creative person. and, and so, uh, you know, [artist 2] kind of killed his career too, but he was on the way to killing his career himself. um, but what he did, is he discovered "oh well i don't need that system" and so he went and worked outside of that system and he would take acting jobs merely to pay for him to be able to make movies and he's a guy who –– there's still probably twenty or thirty unfinished works in [artist 1's] movies that exist out there but over the course of his life he would take a job doing you know those wine commercials, and then part of his vestibulation was that he would get the crew for a weekend. and he would go out and shoot on something that he had been working on for twenty years, right? and so he was a guy you just kinda never gave up and had an idea of what he wanted, and realized he didn't need to work within the system that, that, that discouraged him from being creative and he had, you know he could then\ :  and then he also said this is no way to make a life –laughs- at the end of his life. : and then just personally, i have a friend, who i work with quite a bit, and he drives me nuts. but... he's a super creative person, and he's one of the small handful of people that i've met in the industry that have that level of creativity. he's also a very self-destructive person too, which is why he drives me nuts, but he's, he's a guy that we can just immediately click creatively and, and the sky's the limit, we don't put any, any um roadblocks in our own way from being creative. : so that, you know, that's a big, he really uh... he really influenced me, or maybe uh, there's some almost certain sort of friendly rivalry or competitiveness of being, of pushing each other, uh, to go beyond what we would normally do. you know? : uh, twenty-some years, twenty... three years? : we met in [city], we were both uh working at the second city, in the theater there, and both of us didn't really fit in, so we fit in together. you know, so. yeah : mhm. absolutely. uh, i really like uh, i get so much out of it as far as the energy that a lot of young people have, and that is really important just to me on a selfish level to work with young people i really like that? um, but i like, yeah, i think it's important to, especially to sort of teach people, and you can only do so much 'cause you have to, there are pitfalls, and you're going –– you know, you have to learn from those things but you can maybe help guide people to do things that you did wrong –laughs- or that you see other people doing that, that can you know, uh... can derail your goals and your vision and, and what you wanna do.  : uh, don't do this business. -both laugh- if they're super creative –– yeah no, for real, it's um, it's hard, you know, it's a hard life and there's uh there's certainly rewards and benefits and there's you know ah ah but, if you can do something else, uh... do it. you know, if somebody is –– if somebody can do, if they can, if their art doesn't need to be in this industry or in this town, go live in austin or portland or san diego and be in that world, and tend bar, and have art shows, you know... and do what you know, that's what i would say. but if they really wanted to be in this business i would say, uh... don't, i just sorta don't compromise who you are and what you're trying to do just to earn a buck.  : yeah. : yeah. : there's two almost sort of diametrically opposed, there's the, the uh... really nice person –laughs- who, who um... is sort of encouraging to everybody around them and they're, and they celebrate everyone around them that they're working –– you know, very collaborative and film is a very collaborative thing so they're, so uh that person who tends to do well. and then there's the absolute narcissist. : borderline sociopath\ : \who does very well. -both laugh- um, a lot of the people in between, they're, you know it's a full spectrum ranging from you know –– hacks do really well in this business, and then there are people who do well sort of on the other side of things in the business and you can sort of tell, "oh yeah that person's gonna do really well as a development executive" or whatever. um, yeah. and then you can tell people who don't have it –laughs- so, yeah. : yeah. : they all –– they tend to do better –interviewer laughs- even if yeah, you know.  : um... i think it's changing. which is great, but i think that there were a lot of attitudes that kept women from being creative and expressing themselves creatively. um, i don't think that women are any less creative, and i certainly, i, i know um... i, you know, so many amazingly talented and creative women, but a lot of times it is discouraged, it's discouraged within families, it's discouraged within uh the society itself, it's you know you sort of get discouraged in the school systems, you know, and in growing up it's discouraged that, that, uh, you know maybe if you're a funny girl, you wouldn't be as attractive to boys maybe, or you know other girls or whatever it is. but yeah, you know unfortunately i think it's been a long time of uh... and you'll still hear, you still hear people say "oh, women aren't funny" or you know, those sorts of things. : it –laughs- it's very interesting, because when i read the thing you uh... your um specs on the study, you mentioned picasso and mozart. : and both of those uh men grew up in families where their parents were in uh fields that they uh later excelled at. : and from a very early age, they had uh... i mean not only were they recognized for their talents but they had formal backgrounds so that then they could just –– so their formal education, in music and art, by the time they were twenty they had completely said, "we don't need these, we're gonna do our own thing." : i, you know, not that my parents aren't creative, or that my family wasn't –– they just didn't understand it. they didn't, you know, um... they never –– i mean maybe my dad discouraged it because he, you know, he was a religious guy, who, maybe it wasn't what he thought would be the best thing for me to do, but um, yeah. no one ever really discouraged me, but i didn't have those... i didn't have creative parents or parents who pursued things creatively or even had much in the way of uh, an aesthetic. um, for some things, and then for other things, you can't, you know everyone has some kind of sense of something, you know. uh... and so i don't, i don't –– i just was creative very young, and, and fortunately met people when i was young who were you know my classmates and stuff, and some of them i still work with, you know, and we um, we clicked creatively and we just started going, so\ : yeah. i didn't have any um, i wouldn't say that anything in my family led me in this direction although my brothers are creative and uh and my sister is too, and you know, they haven't pursued a career in it, but they're creative people.  : um, i mean it could very well be that i needed to subvert and so you what i –– you know, maybe it came out of being rebellious in some way or, or needing attention, maybe there is a level of narcissism to it um... you know.  : yeah.  : yeah. : yeah, yeah. : -laughs- it certainly might. : yeah, yeah that's it you know\ : yes, yeah for sure. that's you know, yeah it definitely grew out of um... i just wanted to ruffle feathers, you know and so the very first sort of you know creative impulse is to act out, you know, and misbehave, and you know use foul language and you know, whatever you can do, whatever you can do to be shocking and then you hopefully... learn how to be shocking in smarter ways or whatever –laughs- but, yeah, i think maybe that's where it came from, you know. : um... that's such a thing that i do think about all the time, 'cause i do know a lot of people who are, who are completely irrational or um... they lack focus or they lack you know all of those sorts of things. and it drives me nuts because i think you have to have them both to, to... do it. you might be able to go –– like, i think you need to set up... -beeping noise- : change the batteries? okay. i'll hold that thought. : oh, alright. okay, cool, alright. (inaudible, 25:38) : um... i th –– you, you know i think even in you know [artist 3], was a completely rational person. : he got drunk, and did his paintings, um, and i actually watched a show about this just recently but uh but i thought this before but it was about him, about how fractals explain how he was able to do what he did, and it was you know, it was a show about maths, a british show. um, but uh, he knew what he was doing. he was completely rational about what he was doing and what... you know he could not have created what he created on the scope that he created them without... some rational thought, and attention to detail, and um focus.  : now he may have been chemically aided\ : \in that, and that's a whole other thing, but um... and as far as intuition i think that... i mean i think you, i think that you learn intuition and, and you train to be intuitive. : and maybe it's instinctive, training those instincts. maybe you have a natural proclivity for something but, in order for it to become that second-nature thing where you are, where you feel like you're channeling or whatever it is that you know you'll hear artists talk about, you know especially like musicians is sometimes like improvisational musicians –– they feel like they're just a conduit for it. : but it's because they've trained themselves to do that by learning three chords at first –laughs- and you know what i mean? so you have to –– and it may happen in leaps and bounds, or it may happen in tiny increments or it may be imperceptible. : but you know twenty-five years ago, i didn't have the same level of instinct, or intuition, for what works and what's not gonna work as i do now, you know so you definitely are learning it. you're learning how to tap into that thing and how to get to a flow state and how to like um...-sirens in background- i mean, you know, i guess to get into a zen like space where time and space stops existing so that all you're doing is, is flowing, whether that's you know in my case as a writer, or if i'm, i'm uh acting, improvising or something like that –– even editing, which is a very uh... structure thing there –– i get into flow state, and i, you know, that's a canvas for me and a palette of tools that can sometimes be uh you know i can get into that, that space that's just is um jackson pollock-y is jackson pollock, you know as far as... flowing i guess, i guess flowing. so i guess that's intuition, or instinct, or, or versus the rational. but i think you have to have that foundation of rational and um i think you have to set up a work flow to flow, you know. -laughs- : i, i get drunk... no i'm just kidding –laughs- : um, yeah, so i wake up very early in the morning, i do, i get all of my busy work, administrative tasks done, all of that stuff done before anyone's awake in the office. and then as soon as people are in the office i turn my phones off –laughs- i turn the internet off and i write or edit or study lines or whatever i have to do for another four or so hours. then i'll take a break and exercise and then i'll come back and either follow up on what needed to be followed up on for the day or i'll do maybe a little more creative work if i'm feeling –– you know sometimes that, exercise will oftentimes make the brain work a little better. yeah, so, that's my day, pretty much. : morning person. : i don't um, -laughs- i'm in bed by 9:30 at night. : yeah, yeah, yeah. : oh, interesting. : yeah. : oh wow. : yeah. : okay. : yeah. : yeah. : yeah, yeah. but it's, you know it's both.  : it's absolutely both i, there are two scripts that i've had in my head for ten years, and they're not there yet. : and they're not on paper in any way, no notes, no nothing, but they –– they're there, and um, and i'm not ready. and then there's ju –– you know, i do, a lot of what i do is a commercial artform if you wanna even call it that like you know, hopefully most of what i do –laughs- supercedes that, or, or, or, or, you know, or is at least the best version of that i can do, but you know, to pay the bills in this business you do a lot of, of stuff, so you have to be constantly using uh those tools, whatever. um, the best stuff i do is not for mainstream film and television things, and i definitely have –– i do a lot of video art and experimental film and things like that, and they kind of are sitting around waiting for me to just be ready to put uh, a show together, which i'm also not ready to do yet. so, so they're there, and i do them whenever i get the bug to do them, but uh... they're not... shared yet. : mhm. : yeah. : yeah, yeah. : um, you know obviously when i was younger i think that ability was... that level of recall was a little more accessible and quicker. : but as all things slow down, it's kind of better now, 'cause you don't –– it works on a deeper level, you think things through a little bit, um, i think it comes like –– getting back to flow state, when you're in a flow state, i think like an athlete does this too, you know where an athlete um... is able to think three moves ahead, but they're also exactly where they're at, and they also have in mind what just happened, and i think, and, and you know, maybe they're the most like flow state-y people of all, and especially like football players or something like that, where uh there's so many variables going on, um, and so i feel like when i get into that space... things are just makin' sense to me, so i'm able to either remember them, store them, or uh, uh, uh, recall them, reference them, and use them when i need them uh in that, in that uh... time frame. in that, like, like, you know, it's like, say you're in –– i was just directing a cartoon the other day, and then this guy was doing things and you know my brain just starts, you know as he's doing voiceover recording i start going "oh yeah i can call that back" later in the thing. so i have to have it in my head so i can remind him to record that little ad, added moment. : uh.... and then –– you know, then, then, and i don't know if that's quite making sense, but you know, you, it, you're kind of improvising. i guess it's your, you're constantly improvising, you have to be completely in the moment, but you also have to know where you're at, in what scene, or what you're doing there –laughs- so you have to be aware of what came before, you have to be in the moment, you also have to be sort of kind of second guessing what might happen and your, your brain is thinking, "okay i can go in this direction if that happens, i can go or i can just respond" and it's all split-second though, 'cause you are dealing with you know maybe one, two, three, four other actors, or five other actors in a scene, or musicians if they're improvising or whatever, and they're you know and so you get... you, yeah, it's just there. : i don't know. : yeah. : yeah. : um... i mean i, i, i, i, i can be a very thoughtful person and sometimes to a fault where i don't like to inhibit, um, and i am critiquing, and i guess the best possible scenario is you're saving the judgment for later. and so you're allowing, you're throwing everything at the wall and seeing what sticks, and you're allowing for that uh, you're allowing for creative mistakes to happen, you're allowing for, for um, uh for those responses to be genuine, or um completely reactive sometimes, and uh that's maybe the best state, but that's not necessarily finished work and so the judgment comes in when you do go back and you revise or you, you, you, you think –– or, depending, again it depends on what you're doing because sometimes you're pre-judging in a way where you've already thrown those things out in your brain and you've gone "oh, come on that's hacky" or, and you've already moved on from that. you hope that you're already operating beyond a hacky level but it's not always true, you know, so –laughs-  : hmm, well probably i guess just coming out to [city 1] without much support. taking the risk after college, trying it out. : um, i think i've always had the philosophy that i'd rather try something and fail at it versus play it safe.  : probably my own desire for comfort. -laughs- : um, you just have to look at what you want more. that's what i usually do.  : yeah. : well i mean in ninth grade that was a huge catalyst to where my career went. that was the first time i ever acted. i was part of a theater troupe in the ninth grade and toured in the south east. it was like, that was kind of where i fell in love with it.  : well, i enjoyed the process of it, like, becoming another character like that was gratifying and creative. i also felt like i was good at it. that was part of it too. i liked being good at something.  : i just um, it became more and more something i wanted to do with my life and then um i shifted from theater to film and tv, like on camera. which, i think as i grew as a person, i matured. i wanted more realism. i wanted to portray more realism and less fake performance. and so that’s why i went with that route. so i think it went from an initial like performance playing big sort of thing to like realizing i wanted to be realistic and affect people and let them completely buy into me as that character.  : um, get in classes and just do it.  : um, if i had the resources to do it, i would have. but i didn’t know what i wanted to do until later. so it was like as i went, i was discovering. it was a hobby at first or an interest and then it became like okay i'm actually gonna do this as a career, i want to try to do this as a career. so, yeah. : many.  : as many as you can get.  : well i think identity could fluctuate over time a little bit. do you mean professional identity or personal identity?  : yeah i mean that would be one thing i would tell any aspiring actor to figure out is what is their identity and what is their brand first because you have to market that.  : leading organizations? : no, it's always collaborative, so the more you can connect with other artists, the better.  : i would have to like put a caveat on either way answer. -interviewer laughs- you can't maintain your exact personal values and still play another character so you have to be able to like forgo that to some degree. i think you should have established values on what you will do and what you won't do.  : mmm, i think it's an influential art. and um, it’s a privilege and honor to get to step into a place to affect people emotionally. sometimes you even get to help people heal. you know, if you tell a story that’s very similar to a story they’ve gone through, they can find a lot of comfort in that. it might be thought provoking or affect people in a positive way. i've always wanted to do that i want to affect people in a positive way even if it's like a sad emotion, it's like it can cause some sort of realization versus like something that makes people feel bad or gross or whatever. : i'd say probably because more than that i enjoy it. but they're both there.  : stubbornness. -both laugh- i just can't imagine what else i would do and enjoy it as much.  : yes. : uh, i needed money so i took another job and it was like a desk job and it was sort of in the same industry but wasn’t nearly as gratifying. i did it for 4 ½ years. and i noticed that i kind of forgot about my love for acting. but then i also got super bored and dead inside. i had to make a choice.  : yeah.  : um, yeah. : yeah, absolutely.  : well a lot of the people i would think of personally are like authors and things like that. so um, i mean c.s. lewis, bill johnson. but then like as far as acting goes, i would think more of my acting coaches that i've had. so, a woman named [inspiring person 1] was usually important to me.  : so much. -both laugh- um, i feel like from c.s. lewis i learned the essence of who god is. big life philosophical questions. and then from [inspiring person 1], it was like understanding how my inner self works in creating emotionality in a character. she gave me a lot of tools as far as the crafts go that have been super helpful.  : she was probably one of the best teachers i've ever had. even compared to like teachers in college. um, but she had the ability to be intense and loving at the same time. you'd feel like she was incredibly for you, but you would never feel like you could... she wasn’t the kind of person you could feel like you could joke with. but she just was incredibly compelling as a person and caring with a like quiet strong intensity.  : um, i didn’t talk to her nearly as much as she talked to me. -laughs- like, you know it was all about the craft. it was a little bit about life...but yeah just mostly about getting the piece of material and working through it and learning how to do that.  : yeah, it is.  : well actually i do coach young actors a lot and um i want to teach them about the art and make them better, but i also want them to not be hurt by the industry and feel rejected so it's like i'm kind of giving them perspective while also hoping to motivate them to try really hard and work hard.  : you just hopefully get them to love the art and love doing it rather than love the result. 'cause if they're going into an audition and they're like "i want to get it i want to get it" it's like winning a lottery if you get something in [city 1]. there's like a thousand other people auditioning for the same role. so, you can't take not getting a role as rejection. you have to just enjoy doing it and keep trying because you love it.  : the leave part i don’t think i can tell that. i can tell people who are likely to succeed if they stick at it long enough.  : uh, usually an intuitive sense um, they can digest material quickly, they're creative with their choices, but not so out of the box that you can't relate to it. if someone has some sort of natural humor, i always look at that and go that’s a really valuable skill set, or trait maybe.  : yeah, to a degree, to a degree. i'm thinking about this show i worked on where i was an acting coach. and like the parents, the actors who played the parents. my sense was that the women in the areas – whether they're directors or actors or whatever, there was a sense that they were more insecure in their jobs, like they were afraid they were going to lose the job, whereas the men seemed to be like i got this, no big deal.  : i think it's probably just the way things have been for women for so long. i think we're making huge strides as far as women inequality in the work place, but i still feel like.. that on top of it being coupled with a job that everyone wants. sometimes in women there's a cattiness. so there's a place of someone's trying to be a friend to my face and is gonna like bad mouth me behind my back and try to get my job or something like that. i don't really see men doing that as much.  : that's interesting, 'cause i have a real habit of value of how i balance my own life. a lot of people would say in acting you can't do that. you have to choose career over other things. i just don't want to believe that. like it's probably true if you look at the numbers, but like i just feel like you know. which would you rather say at the end of the day? that you have a career or a great family? that your kids are going to love and care about you and look at you in a certain way? or you're not going to know your families at all. maybe your kids are messed up or in jail because you weren't there. so, i would always encourage people to fight for balance even though it’s a difficult career for people to do that in.  : yeah, absolutely. um, there's so many examples of people. there's so many examples i could land on, i'll land on one or two. i mean i always did athletics growing up, so i was always on teams. and then, you know, you just learn things from your teammates whether it’s a skill or just how to be cool and not cool. what is cool and what's not cool. um... and professionally for my peers... i mean they all just teach me who people are. that’s one of the most important things for my profession is knowing a lot of people because you know how to play those different characters. i mean there's probably only 100 types of people. like if you really got to know a ton of people, you could play any role.  : um, i think it was incredibly important. my parents were pretty strict, but they also very loving and consistent. and uh so i had a real sense of right and wrong. i was given a lot of responsibility incrementally growing up, so i learned to be responsible pretty quickly, or in a good way. i think they imparted a really good value system to me. they were always really supportive of whatever i chose to do.  : what age category are we talking about? -both laugh- : i mean i did gymnastics as a kid. i was literally in the gym five days a week, four hours a day. i grew up in [state 1], so we were out in the woods doing stuff. just built a log cabin when i was eight with somebody.  : one.  : uh, not as much, or certainly not in the same way. he's more like, task-oriented, um, also into sports, very athletic. : mhm, yeah, very much so. : the ideas of my work... : oh, um, like the work that i do now? : i mean... life, you know. like if i'm writing something, i'm pulling inspiration from the things that i have seen or things that i've observed. but i also find that it helps me to write with a purpose. so like, i wrote some commercials recently for a friend of mine and this new app, and it was a lot easier to focus in, because i knew like we had to try to sell them to push the app. like we have to –– that's the message. like the app's great, and we've gotta get all these key points. so that was a lot easier for me to write, just a story where it's like, "what am i writing about?" could be a million things.  : usually which one pays the best. -both laugh- : no, i've never been overrun with options in my field. i would like to be, i would like to have that problem.  : i mean they're both important. i think intuition for me is probably more important. but... things have to be rational, i mean i'm a pragmatic person too. i think i look for things with a purpose, for things that make sense, things that register. if it's too abstract i feel like it doesn't satisfy me as a creative thing –– it's like, if i have to explain it to somebody i'd rather not do it.  : i've had a tough time like with my own creativity being real methodical, because i am such an intuitive person, but um yeah actually comparatively so, i know there are a lot of methods in writing and acting and wherever else, and i just have a hard time following step by step.  : you mean if i had one idea and then i think of another similar idea? : yeah i'm sure i do. i mean, i can't think of an example but that's kinda how ideas work, isn't it? -laughs- : occasionally, yeah. : definitely while lying in bed, yeah.  : a good bit. i mean if i'm in the middle of a project and i'm thinking about it, if i'm spending time thinking about it, yeah it's gonna pop in there, ideas are just gonna pop in throughout the day. : uh, seven to eight. if i'm, you know, making the right choices. -both laugh-  : late at night.  : well, scripts are pretty easy, 'cause you read it, and you start getting these ideas about the characters, and seeing things in your imagination. so i'll know if i'm playing, potentially playing a role, what role i'd be looking at, so –– but i also care about the story, i read it just like i would a novel, you know, and i get a sense of the character intuitively. and then i start to reread it, start looking for, looking a bit closer at it, and if i don't have the full story of the script if i just have the side, which is the excerpt, that's really where i put my creativity into it, i'll go really slowly, and i'll look at every clue i get, even the name choice that the author made, cause a lot of times you, there is a connotation, something that you associate with the type of name and the type of person that it is. i think writers do that when they write. that was one thing that saxon taught me to do, just let your imagination create something as you read, and you'd be surprised how accurate it gets usually to what the author wanted. um so you get a sense of the character, and the motivation of the character, what do they want to do, what do they want to get, what are the obstacles, what's the relationship between the people they're talking to. those are the most important things and then i'll start, once i get a sense of what those things are, then i'll start trying to memorize it and play it out, and then i like to have a lot more creative development with the scene partner or a practice partner, in the moment a lot of things come up and you're like, "oh, didn't think about that choice." : umm definitely...i haven't really dived into it creatively. it's more like if there's a purpose or like when someone needs help writing something for like a monologue or an audition piece, or if i have a buddy who is in commercials and who is willing to pay me to write some stuff...i'll be like sure. i'll probably do a lot more of it later in life, but it's definitely not a creative thing that gets me excited. unless, i'm working with other writers if we're collaborating, i just like to have some personal feedback so i know how to do well in the process. : if it is field work then i am confident, then i am the leader, but i guess it just depends on the dynamics of the group and what the personalities are, cause if someone else is fighting for the leadership role then i'll just let him have it. : it's really helpful, i don't know if it's critically important, but it definitely makes it easier to do something.  : no... i don't look at the system. : if i was going to write a feature film script, i'm sure i would do that. but i haven't done any project that would require such a toolset for me. but the acting stuff comes so intuitively to me that i don't need to do that, some actors do though.  : it's all up here. : once you start visualizing a scene, it just sticks with you, at least it does for me, i don't need to write it out... it just sort of becomes cognitive, a different part of my brain. : what i have noticed is that there are certain actors who would get really analytical with the script, and write out this huge backstory of the characters and do all this creative work and then they have a difficult time taking that and assimilating it into playing it out in front of a real place, it's just too much the analytical part of your brain, versus that creative part of your brain. i look at it as imagination vs. analytics. if it's imaginative, i wanna step inside the character. i wanna have the character's thoughts versus like know, from a writer or director's perspective. when you write it out, you are a writer or director. but i am the actor. i wanna become the character. i wanna have the thoughts that the character is having. if the character is saving the world, i don't need all these outside things. i don't need to know what the observer is gonna see, i need to know what's motivating the person, what they're trying to get, does that make sense? : yeah.  : i mean i think there needs to be a moment of inspiration whether it is a thought or idea or something in the moment that happens, and that's usually what happens for me when i work with people or even just having someone to voice it with and get their reaction like once i speak it out to a person i-it's like i can hear when i'm saying does it makes sense and then there's something about having a person there that i get slightly self-conscious enough to go and start looking at it from different angles. but um like this inspiration moments, those are the ones that usually just build on each other it's like this idea then what about this and then this, it's like there's a momentum that just happens but i couldn't tell you exactly how it all works. : it depends on kind of if i'm on a project or not really, like i need to get better at when i'm not on a project just picking up scripts and acting just for the sake of acting, i have a tough time with that but that's probably just how difficult modern life is- survival and stuff like that.  : as much time as i need to to be good like it could vary depending on the size of the project or what i have to do. : when i'm having to do multiple roles like if i'm just an actor but if i'm doing so many different roles on a project i'm producing it casting it writing it acting in it like i'm doing all that stuff, yeah i have definitely worked way too long and gotten really tired but i wouldn't call most of that creative work it's more like task oriented stuff that has to get done in order to accomplish the project : if i’m on a roll i’m getting, i wouldn’t take a break but if i’m in a place of like can't break through can't come up with an idea, don’t know what to write next or what to do next for the character something like that that’s usually when i take a break : i surf, i work out, go to the gym. i do play-well i don’t play so much anymore but i did play baseball in college and i played a little just as a hobby too, softball, things like that, tennis, golf, occasionally. i mean yeah that’s all about it. : they definitely give me energy, i don’t know that they directly influence like what i would create or do but they definitely are a part of me being my best.  : like um the more similar products that are made there will be more made in the future? : yeah okay. : yeah i think so, i think there’s some muscle. i would tell anyone that i was coaching like if you want to get good at acting you just keep doing it and doing it and doing it because every time you do it you will learn something else, discover something else, you are going to have new ideas. : i mean i definitely have noticed the more i’m doing it the better i am at it and the easier it comes, for sure for sure.  : like with that with acting specifically i think there really is no end, you know like you could you could make a decision to end because it's like maybe you have a performance and its gotta happen but you could spend forever exploring i think.  : there’s a point where like my personal energy or interest in a product hits, it just hits, plateaus so it's like i don't really want to go back after that point and i don’t know, it’s probably different for everything. but there’s maybe some amount of time or effort i’ve put into it and at some point i’m like “okay ready to move onto something else.” like i wouldn’t want to do a long theater run and have to play the same character over and over again every night. : well that’s hard to say i mean, there's so many actors who don’t do much really. i'm in the middle i'd say in the middle somewhere. : i probably spend less time than the average. : yeah i think so. : i don’t know, like i feel like maybe i was born with it? : let me think, -australian accent- i suppose that’s right i suppose it’s easy to switch form one character? : -southern accent- or if you want to you can take it a little bit slower and you can ease into a character real easy like…. : now that you mention it, yeah i think creativity in a way is problem solving and so there’s holding perhaps two ideas that are different to figure out a bridge between them- yeah i could see it that way, : well i would say when i started writing is where i would notice that phenomenon, acting just comes super intuitive so i don’t usually have difficulty in figuring out what to do next. but what was your question i’m sorry? : that’s where having someone to talk to is helpful for me, i think it’s all internal and i’m an internal processor anyway, but if i’m that’s where it tends to get foggy but when i can speak it all out with someone i can keep the ideas going as far as what i’m doing and it’s like one possibility one possibility one possibility one possibility. i do find actually that i do brainstorm when it comes to a writing project or anything really other than acting. i would probably use some of those tools but there’s just acting is so intuitive for me. yeah. : probably. : well i think that i- for no particular reason and it’s probably annoying to people and corny but i always look for double meanings in words, like i just do i don’t know why i just do. it’s usually because i’m trying to make a joke. : i would not call myself a pun master. and i try to do it in such a way where people think- where i don’t react to it at all, just slip it in there really dead pan, and that seems to be funny to people. whereas if my dad did it he would think he made the best joke ever. it’s almost like i’m kind of saying “yeah i know this is dumb but i’m doing it anyway.”  : both at times, yeah i mean i’m certainly distractible but i also have experience really focused moments and i can focus, i just it helps to have higher stakes forcing me to focus. : not as much that it's more a threat of embarrassment or failure, i think if i know i’m going to be on stage in front of some people or on set and i might get fired if i don’t have my lines down then that’s pretty motivating to be focused and get a job done. but in my personal life if i don’t have really any consequences it’s hard to be focused sometimes.  : in my personal life i would say i forget things quickly, and professional i think i retain the knowledge pretty well. : it could be i mean i also just don’t i don’t spend a lot of time retrospect in my life, like i just kind of live in the present you know. the past is the past you’re not going to go back and relive it too much. but obviously if i’m trying to learn something then i am retaining it pretty quickly.  : no. : it’s not really something i thought about a ton but i mean to be truly creative you do have to break out of the mold like if it's an established pattern of something and you’re familiar you need something totally new there is something to that that’s tough like the more you look at the how things have been done the more you want to continue that trend so it is hard to break out of that i would almost rather have if someone wanted me to create something new i would almost rather not have too much information about the predecessors of it because i want a fresh look at it but i don’t know if that’s quite what you’re getting at.  : i wouldn’t want uh, okay so a progression of let's say creating a new phone, not that i would do that but like, so iphone 3, 3gs all these progressions of iphone i wouldn’t want to look at all those progressions in order to come up with a brand new completely iphone. i would rather not have all that and think about like what is possible and what would the dream phone be.  : yeah i think so. : i think, i’m thinking about my acting process right now. so i tend to get an initial inspiration imagination about a character, and once that’s established it’s difficult to deviate it’s like i would need to erase that from my mind and go back and start fresh again which i’ve never really done i’m usually stuck with whatever comes and build off of it. but as far as inhibiting thoughts, like makes me think distracting thoughts and things like that but that’s not what you’re saying you’re saying- : yeah well i’m always looking for something a bit different from the normal. i mean the normal does come and that’s probably how most of the people are going to audition and i get that role so i'm trying to think how can i do it that still makes sense for the character- how can i search it deeper so that it's something maybe no one would think of, but yeah so i don’t know if i inhibit those thoughts or if i just keep going until i have something that feels more original. : i think people who know me well might say i’m somewhat impulsive but i think most people who know me a little bit would just think i’m responsible and really steady. : uh i don’t think so.  : no. : i think because now i do look for the more creative i look for things that are more outside of the box whereas probably early on in my career i didn’t do that i didn’t i just went with the first thing that came to me.  : yeah a lot of it is. getting a perspective of the industry and the job that i have that was working in the industry as a talent manager for 4.5 years so i saw things from a much broader perspective and saw the competition level in a [city 1] in a whole new way and i was like “i get it now.” once you actually sit in an audition room and see 100 people come through you start to get it like sometimes it isn’t even the best acting choice it’s just because it was different form everybody else-they standout and they're like “well we will have this person come back for a call back because they did it that way and it kind of worked." : i mean not a drastic paradigm shift i don’t think. little lessons along the way but i wouldn’t call it a paradigm shift. : i think there’s an aspect of play that’s really important for my creative process. i need to feel like i’m having fun to come up with the most creative ideas which also needs an environment where everything is okay. i also find that i struggle sometimes with being too critical in the process early on and i feel like really worried which stifles your creativity. you kind of have to be able to go “this is just what it for now, i can always tweak it and make it better” but to get something out you just have to try it you just have to jump off a ledge. i'm thinking more in terms of writing but i think it's true for acting too it's just i’ve been acting for so long it’s just like i have no fear anymore and i’m very impulsive when i’m creating a character, i know those impulses lead me to something creative. but it always has to come from a sense of like i’m having fun, i’m playing.  : um, that's a good question. barely. sorry, that's the joke answer. the real answer, um, through an effort to not spend too much time overthinking things or being precious about them and through some effort to create good habits for myself that lead those other things. this is much more reflection than i was expecting today.  : influenced the direction of my career. hm... i'd say the first project working the theater company i mentioned to you earlier, [company 1], was my first time working as a collective of people trying to do something significantly different from what other folks were doing in theater in a uniquely like-minded way that i believe has influenced, i mean both in my continued work inside the group and outside it.  : yeah, that is a good way of putting it. the combination of the sense of collaboration and the sense of this is a group of people who are trying to collaborate to do something, paradigm shifting is a good a way to put it as any. : um... okay. the company bills itself as a design-centered company, which is one way of putting it, but i don't think sums it up very well. it tends to be- expressionistic is almost the right word- using a lot of puppetry, a lot of mask work, a lot of technology to tell the stories in a larger than life kind of way. almost cartoony at times. i say that in a positive way, that's my bias.  : um, it showed me, first my own inclination to create things that are larger than life in that way that express themselves by being an inflated version of things but also by showing me that it was achievable to work with a team of people who that were like-minded in that way. it's the sort of work that can be kind of isolating. like there are not a lot of other people who are on the same page – and nobody is on the exact same page as far as it goes- but it was a revelation that it was even possible to find a group of people that much on the same wavelength when it was a relatively odd wavelength to be on.  : oh, definitely, yes. : i would probably avoid giving them advice. if i were to give them advice, i would say to work to find those like-minded people, those people who are looking to do the same thing, but to not avoid taking steps while you wait to find those people to start moving forward and then try to find them as well. that's a little bit like advice, right? : i'm sure it has : yeah, like i said, this is more reflection than i intended to do today and i don't take as much time to maybe reflect on these things as would be wise, so i don't necessarily have an answer ready at hand as far as perspectives have been, but i think most of the time it's instinctive rather than intellectual that you have this sense that, you know, you're moving towards something that is satisfying and appealing, so you keep doing it. : i have a strong tendency towards rationality that i push against to try to work intuitively. : um, i don't know that large number of social contacts, it probably can't hurt, but finding the people who are connected to things that you find interesting and finding then the things they're connected to you might find interesting and then the people who are connected to those things, following the path of interesting things seems to be- at least it's worked for me to some extent. rather than casting a wide net and trying to find out which of the people in that net are inclined in the same way. i'm fascinated by the collar on the coat you're wearing. : um... i... : i definitely think it is. i think communication, both practically and artistically are both vital things. okay, i'm going to get really heady in the answer to this one. the ability to communicate practical things is something creatures have in general. if they're feeling pain, anger, anything, they can communicate that. and as humans, we have this amazing ability to communicate abstractions to communicate ideas. about the future, about the past, about thoughts we're having. the ability to take that to an even higher level to communicate stories of things that have never happened or emotions that someone hypothetically felt or ideas of what could be are some of the highest aspirations i think of people and often strongly influence the ability to create practical things further down the line, um yeah. :  i tend to do it for very selfish reasons mostly because i take a lot of satisfaction from doing something that hasn't been done before or creating something that didn't exist before. you know, it's easy to intellectualize why it's important and i believe those things, but more primary to the thing that keeps me doing them is a sense of personal reward from having done them.  : yes, and that goes a lot toward the obstacle i was talking about earlier. i am able to get myself aligned and working in full force for periods of time and then it’s easy to sort of go out of alignment and you know not stop working partially because of the habits i'm trying to build, but certainly not move forward as consistently or effectively. i'm going to go on a little bit more, sorry, but the feeling that you're firing on all cylinders. that you are mentally and physically in the state in which you are going to do your best work is a rare feeling and you can cultivate it, but only to a certain extent, and when you're struggling to get that feeling, it can undermine your excitement to create work that you know is not going to be your best.  : i think so, yeah, i think that's a really good point, like collaborations not only align you, but also having sort of that community responsibility gives you that impetus to continue working because there's a group task you're working on that needs to be completed, whether or not you're at 100%, in full alignment, firing on all cylinders, all of it. all of the metaphors whether or not they're all in play, you have to get something done and that sort of community responsibility and communication makes a significant difference.  : there have been a lot of people who i have admired for beating their own path, for doing something that was just the thing they were excited to do. that wasn't something that they saw someone else doing and tried to replicate and improve on, but just something completely unique. there's that category of people and there are the big collaborations i get excited by. i see a partnership of people or a group of people and admire the way they feed off of each other and balance each other. it's sort of a vague answer. : some of them. some of them are famous performers, famous writers, and some of them are people that i see around me. : um, i love helping people with the practical things, with showing them things that i know they would probably figure out on their own eventually, but hopefully i can get them a little closer. mentoring is a term that carries a huge amount of weight for me, like similar to apprenticing, and in my mind to mentor somebody is to take a huge amount of responsibility for their development and i don't personally feel like i am in a place of such thorough competency that i would take on that responsibility. that being said as far as showing people the things i do know i am always excited to do that. : um, okay i'm jumping in between fields in my mind here because i'm not super specialized, but one where i definitely do feel that to some extent is in puppetry. like there are some behaviors and traits that you see in people and you think to yourself, oh you have that combination of extroversion and introversion the special sort of syndrome that indicates that you would or could be, anyway, a talented puppeteer.  : yeah, and maybe it's because i'm not as expert in those other fields. i am a lot of time drawing, but i am not trained in it, and if i see someone who has done a drawing and i'm impressed by it, i think to myself, wow, this person has a talent for it, but it's not the same where i can see their behaviors in a different aspect and think it to myself.  : it's a lot of fun.  : i mostly tend to do the like hand and rod "muppety" style puppets, but i've done, and probably will do again, a lot of the other ones. the theater company tends to do a lot of, there's a japanese form of puppetry called bunraku that's a team-based puppetry style and we tend to use a modified form of that a lot. we just finished a show that had a huge vein of that running through it. marionettes and hand puppets, and all the weird little offshoots, shadow puppets. : yup. : yeah, the traditional japanese bunraku, you have one person who's operating the head of the puppet and the left hand of the puppet, one person whose on the body and the right hand, one person whose operating the two feet. and they tend to be a few feet high. people train all of their lives to be the feet on puppets. : um, for entering, sticking to puppetry, the people who are talented tend to be talented, but more often- there's a pitfall that tends to happen more often with men entering it where, actually okay. there's a separate pitfall i see more often with each gender. men have a tendency to want to show off to upstage a little bit more. women have, more often, have a harder time getting out of their own bodies and into the secondary body. these are tendencies that happen across the board, just slightly more often on one side or the other, but you will see sometimes somebody who wants to behave in a "dancey" sort of way, who wants to move like a dancer when that's drawing attention to them instead of the puppet and you'll see people who are not able to share the spotlight as much, um yeah. and those tend to be people who are starting out, those sometimes, especially the show-offy habit can get reinforced, get positive reinforcement for it, so it can get entrenched sometimes, yeah. : um, i've given that one a lot of thought actually. my family always kind of walked this line between artistic and scientific pursuits. my mother has been a writer my whole life. my father was, or is an engineer, but he's also a poet and played saxophone for most of my life. um, it's a very, my family is a very intellectual family in a lot of ways, but with this strong, almost perverse vain of artistry in it that i think makes it really interesting, but also really conflicted sometimes when trying to express both things. : i think so, yeah, yeah, wanting to find the synthesis of those two things is always an interesting goal for me. : yeah, i have one younger brother. : yeah, he- my younger brother has been working in a way i think i am incapable of. he has been working on a single video game project for a couple of years now, subsisting in a small apartment doing odd jobs and spending most of his days plugging away at this ambitious video game project he's creating from scratch, which i tell people who are wiser about these things than i am that he's creating all of the tools and everything from scratch and they kind of roll their eyes at the idea. um, there's a certain stubbornness to it, but the fact that he's been able to consistently work on this project with zero immediate external reward for such a long time is sort of startling and admirable.  : um, all of the above. : um, just kind of being open to seeing the natural incongruities in like that pop up in things where you think to yourself, oh isn't that funny? or, wouldn't that be funny if animals are really fascinating, both in their behaviors, gosh i'm going off on a weird tangent here, but, it's true. they're both for puppetry and drawing, i spend an awful lot of time looking at the way things behave, things appear. i've been able to spend a lot of time working at the [company 2] down in [city 1], which has been really neat for that. : yeah, it's also a really nice place to be. a lot of noisy kids running around these last several weeks, but still, yeah. : puppetry has- well there's two senses of being done in that case then. there's the sense like you have a performance with a beginning and an end and when it ends it's done, but for these things that you do over and over, weeks or months or years. you never stop refining it, either by actually changing the content, finding something that works better, or by changing minute little details about the way you deliver a specific line or movement. especially, performing for children, especially performing comedy for children, there's such immediate feedback for when something is working well that you, you're constantly cultivating that and i guess that only ends when you-(end of video b)- : um, for drawing, and i've wound up focusing on these things, but that's all right- for drawing, um, it's way too easy for me to just keep adding and trying to fix and make better and i need to cup myself off. like i have to just pick a point and say it's done and then not touch it or things get bad. : usually, yeah. : probably both, actually. um, i think that trying to be overly precious, trying to be overly perfect about it sends it to a place where it’s not as successful, though a lot of that is probably because the same part of your brain you're using to continue adding things is also criticizing it because that's what's allowing you to continue refining. so, that critical part of your brain that makes it hard to continue to moving forward and makes you look at things negatively is the same part that's participating in that refinement process. yeah, that's actually, i've never actually thought of that before so that's, yup. i'm glad we had this talk. : i strive for one anyway. : yeah, it's much easier for me to be rational and logical most of the time i have more of a natural inclination toward it, i work to balance it i think. : i feel like that just happened a minute ago. : yeah. : not as often as i'd like. um i, i think to some extent that's a switch that you can flip where you have something that is important to you, but you don't have the path to it right away so you sort of put it on the backburner, like you maintain an awareness that it's something that's important without actively seeking solutions for it and that leads you to be more observant for things and we have life outside of that thing that are going to present themselves as solutions or clues to that solution. : um, yes. both. partially in just an anxiety influenced sort of what is the next thing i've got to be doing, what am i behind on, what am i okay on, those intrusive thoughts when you are participating in a leisure activity, that is part of it. some of it, you know, if you are watching television, but you are also participating in some kind of story-telling exercise, a play, or something that you, or i, tend to compare what i am doing to what i am watching both... a little bit in terms of quality, but that is a dangerous road to go down, but to think about how the two things relate to each other and inform each other. i think when you sort of steep your brain in a project for a long period of time it's almost impossible to not start applying everything else to it and it to everything else to some extent. if you have been going over and over a set of lines for a play, for example and you see something that relates to them someplace completely other, you can't help but think of those lines, you know. : um, i've been getting around 7, 7 and ½ hours of sleep. : late at night. : um, i think it is more important than i admit to myself most of the time, because the times i do something successfully usually are the times i do have that clear goal, but i think it's also important to be able to work without that clear goal, because you're not always going to have that clear goal, but that doesn't mean you should stop working. that's such a nod answer. : i'm almost finished writing a book, so, i'm pretty proud of that. but i would probably have to say, maybe the most proud is overcoming a lot of family dysfunction.   : just the belief that i could.  yeah, that's the biggest thing... the belief that i could. : this. : project or event... well, my... it wasn't an event so much that it was a lot... you know maybe it was an event.  a friend of mine gave me a book that i read and that really made me feel that i could write the type of thing i'm writing.  this is what this person write and they did it, so i could do that too. : sure.  so, i come from a family, like my parents were - so i was born into a cult and i was in it up until i was eleven years old and it was a christian cult and my - it was a polygamous cult as well.  my dad had two wives and ended up having fifteen kids between them and so i, you know i was born into that and that was very different.  i was not allowed to attend school.  they traveled around a lot.  they kept us out of contact with society as much as possible so we didn't go to school, you know, we didn’t have bank accounts.  we had a po box and people wouldn't know where we lived, for example.  and so, what was the question? -laughs-  : so my life was so different so i thought, you know once i left and i tried to forget about that and have a normal life and i was like that has nothing to do with me that was so long ago, and then she gave me this book and i read it and it was a guy with the huge, david sedaris, he's written a lot of books and his family, he comes from a big family and there's craziness and then i read that and i was like, i guess i could write a book about my life.  maybe somebody would read it because, you know if they read what he wrote, i mean he's amazing, but maybe people are interested in these kind of stories.  so, that kind of inspired me and i started writing then.   : yes, yeah.  she's kind of like, i guess like the family that i never had.  she's younger than me but has always been kind of motherly towards me and quite different than my parents were, you know, they were just very different.  not very, nurturing necessarily. : i have been working on it on and off for so long, probably over six years now. so, it's been an on and off but it's almost done now. it's been a little while now. : thanks. : oh, like encouraging pushes? maybe, yeah. because like when i told - then i started to talk about this part of my life that i never talked about before, you know, nobody, like in high school, nobody would have known, 'cause it wasn't something you bring up to your friends like "oh yeah, my parents were in a cult and my dad had two wives."  like it's not the kind of thing you talk about with your friends in high school, so um, so yeah when i started talking about it, just being more open, people are kind and nice and want to hear more and so it's, yeah, it's been really inspiring and i've read pieces to, you know, writer groups and i've joined writer's groups.  so yeah, it's been a good experience.  i mean part of it obviously has been terrifying because there has been so much dysfunction and so much craziness so writing about it is so intimate and i feel like i'm exposing my parents in a way so that's been not easy, but i just feel like it's what i need to do so i'm doing it.  : um, i was 11 years old. : yes, yes.  it was so great. like i felt like i got to be normal finally.  i mean somewhat normal.  i wasn't normal because like when i went to school i was years behind everyone else so there was a lot to deal with there, but i got to go to school and that was amazing because that's all i wanted for years was to go to school, you know.  so, that was great.  and then, you know, we got to - we didn’t have to go around selling jesus pamphlets, so that was nice.  i felt like i got to be a kid and my mom, she rented us a house.  i felt like i just got to be normal.  it's an amazing feeling, you know, so yeah.   : i guess just do it.  don’t worry about being perfect, just do it and let other people read it and get feedback and fix things and just kind of throw yourself into it.   : um... yes.  i'm trying to think how to say it.  i feel like the biggest change is an identity change and those can be the hardest, because i had identified myself as, quote-on-quote a normal person. that's what i worked so hard to become and then writing kind of connected me to the past and then it was like, oh shit, there's that again. -laughs- so now, it's almost like integrating those two sides of me.  if that makes sense.  and sometimes it's not easy because i don't see myself as an ex-cult member, a kid who grew up in a cult.  but, i was.  and that's who i am.  and i'm not that at all - i'm not related to that at all now i guess, but, to that lifestyle, but it's a part of my past and it's fun that i can tell close friends and laugh about certain things that are ridiculous, so yes.   : yes.   : i think in order to be happy, that's what has to be done, because, like for example if i start to focus on other aspects. like even in my life i've had so many different jobs and some of them - like one job i had, i sold hair transplantation hair for men and i hated that job. i mean it was a terrible job, but i think the thing i hated most about it was that it felt so out of line with my values, like here we're having men have operations to remove hair form here and put it here and they're not getting any more hair, they're just relocating hair, and in fact, ten percent of the hair is dying, and we're playing on their insecurities and that was a job i felt terrible about and i think it made me not feel got about myself.  you know, i'm using that as an example of working for something that you don't really value, but they paid well. and now with writing, i feel like the more i keep in mind my, my value, my values, which i guess in this case would be to share a story that i think will be a value to other people, will give insight to children - there were thousands of children that were born into this go through, you know.  the more i think about - or maybe i'll make someone feel better about their own life, you know.  i'm contributing to society then.  the more i keep that in mind as opposed to, you know, i need money or whatever, then the better i feel and i think i'm more productive. : -laughs- do you mean like why have i kept up with it for so long? : i feel like it's one thing that i can give to the world that nobody else can. -laughs- like i can't just hand it over to someone else and go here you do this.  it's not a job that can be done by anyone else.  even in my research i haven't really come across a book written by a child showing the exact - you know with my sense of humor. and i'm not just trying to make the cult look bad. i want people to understand why people join this and a mentality of the cult. like they really, really meant well, they did.  i'm showing all sides with kind of compassion and understanding.  so, i guess what kept me going is that i feel uniquely qualified for this.  and i enjoy it, i do. i do enjoy people's reactions and feedback and appreciation and laughter and stuff, so, yeah. : yeah, i've gone stretches.  because this hasn't made me money so far, so i've had to have a lot of other things, like other jobs, and sometimes i wouldn’t just - i wouldn't go back to write – i wouldn't write for several months and that's probably - i'm trying to think why.  well, sometimes it seems overwhelming.  i mean i've never wrote a book before and it's kind of an overwhelming project, so just kind of the sheer kind of - and i have to do it all on my own, you know, i don't have a team of people.  it's not like a collaborative job, it's just something - i mean it will be because people edit and i have people, so yes in that regard, but mostly it's really solitary so. and maybe i also don’t have someone really pushing me.  you know, if i had an editor that said, you need this done in six months, then i would, because it's something i'm doing on my own then, i don't know. it's taken maybe longer than it should. but then maybe not because i've never wrote a book before so i feel like it's almost like getting a second degree or a masters because i feel like in the time that i'm not writing, i'll be reading a lot of books or talking to family members about certain things and so it's hard to say exactly when leisure ends and work picks up because it's kind of like melding together.   : not on purpose, but something might trigger it, like, um, you know. i was watching beasts of no nation last night and they carry baskets on their head and so i remembered, oh yeah, in brazil that's what everyone does. i need to make sure i sprinkle that in the book.  just little things that trigger, like "oh yeah, i need to put that in" and then i'll make a quick note and then insert it somewhere so that it's part of the landscape of what's going on because, you know, everything doesn't just come to your mind when you sit there and write later, things come to you as you go along.   : you know what, i think one of the biggest things was talking to people because, like i said, they - i didn't feel judged.  people made me see that, especially friends, close friends, that people are a lot less judgmental than you might think and if, even if they are, they don't care that much about you necessarily.  -laughs- so, yeah, just talking to people and people being accepting of my story and wanting to know more and being sympathetic. yeah, that's a big part of it for this, i guess, a big part. because this is something that will be so, you know, public i guess.   : that's a really good question.  i mean, whenever people come to me and need support i'm supportive but, it actually didn't occur to be that if there's other writers it might be, it would be really helpful for them. i mean that's... yeah, that's really cool.  i mean, yeah, i would like to do that. : yes, yeah, yeah. i go to a story-telling group and they're an incredible little tight since - they're the longest running story group in [city 1].  they meet in [region 1] every wednesday and anyone can show up, they just pay five dollars and people get up and tell stories and yeah, that's a really incredible group actually.  they've been a great source of support. : it's like the moth i would say, but i think the moth is a little more intense and people might be\ : yeah. : yeah, yeah, exactly. it's just like that but anyone can go up, i mean, yeah. : -laughs- ...that's a really good question.  i mean you can tell whose really, really good.  i don't know if that helps.  yeah, i don't know if i can tell at this point.  : -laughs- i think the best people are people who, who as far as telling their story, but they don't have to be.  but it would relate to the most amount of people so they would be very visual so they're using visual words to tell their story but also kinesthetic so they're also very feeling as well.  they're conceptual so they're very good at creating a story and its very hard for someone to be all three, but that would obviously be an indicator. : yeah, i'm not sure.  : it's super important. : i think it's important across the board.  i would say, always put enough - have enough time to do things that make you happy every day. -laughs- i think that's super important. put aside time to do something that makes you happy every day, that you can look forward to every day. : so, before the age of eleven, i spent most of my time probably taking care of babies and cleaning and proselytizing with my parents, like going around and, you know, singing or trying to get people to, you know, read our scripture, things we had.   : then, i got to go to school so, i was just so happy to go to school and i guess i spent a lot of my time in school obviously and then i really worked hard at school because i was just so glad i got to go. so, i did well in school after i finally managed to catch up a bit, like when i was maybe six - seventeen by then. eleven, twelve. yeah like sixteen, seventeen. so, like after five years i somewhat managed to catch up with my peers. i mean i had gaps and gaps in my education, but i could at least keep up in school and do really well in school at that point. so yeah, school. i did a lot of homework.     : yeah. : yeah, yeah. i don't know if they influenced me. oh yeah, you know what, one of my sisters for sure influenced me.  she... she's a very kind person. really, really kind and compassionate and i try to be kind of like her.   : let me think... [sibling 1]... let me see. [sibling 1], [sibling 2], [sibling 3], [sibling 4]. my mom's six kids, not that much i guess. not too much, surprisingly.  i mean, they're creative, they're all really creative, but they're not in necessarily creative careers, so. : i think that's it. : yeah, i mean sometimes i'll research something, i'll come across something and just become obsessive about researching it. so, i'll read a lot of articles. : yes. : i – well, 'cause i think a big problem i have in general is that sometimes i'll be like "oh i need to do all of this" and it just seems so overwhelming. so, i will then just try to just decide, well, how do i break this up and just do, you know, tackle one piece at a time. and so, like for example, right now i just want to edit four pages at a time and i have these four criteria that i'm looking for in the pages, so there's that.  because otherwise, it can be overwhelming and i think that's sometimes why i put it aside for so long. : yes, it is. yes.   : at least 8. : not usually. usually around\ : yeah. : probably in the morning.   : ...you know what, i don't think i've had a set routine because i've had so many like free-lance jobs and other jobs and then, and i just write in between. so, i don't have an exact set routine, so maybe that's not good. that's kind of what i've done. : i just have a list of things i need to do to go over and i look at those and since i have a table of contents, sometimes i will have, i will have, um, an out loud discussion with myself for ten minutes about everything i've done so far and i think saying it out loud is maybe better because it almost makes it, i'm not sure, maybe more memorable. so, i'll discuss it out loud for ten minutes.  maybe as if telling someone else about it.  you know? like a summary.  and so that kind of jogs my memory and i'm like ok, and i'll put a timer on it and do ten minutes. : oh, okay. yeah, i guess so. : maybe four to seven hours. : maybe, two – maybe four to sev – two to seven? maybe three to seven? i don't know. i haven't kept exact track.  : because then i'll do other things. like i'll run an errand or take a phone call.  yeah it's hard to say. what was the last piece of your question? : well, no, because, i mean, like if i'm working other jobs, then i - some days i won't write for days. or sometimes i won't write for days. so, it's hard. i can't really tell you. it's kind of all over the place right now.   : well, can you give me like a - like do you mean -  : oh, i see what you're saying.  like should i just keep writing more and more books and they'll get better and better and then - is that what you mean? : oh yeah, yeah.  like i think i told you i've been on and off for like six years and i look back - because i did have a blog up in like 2010, 2009 and i read some of those and they're good, but i feel like my writing is so much better now.  and so, and i'm a bit of a perfectionist so i do think it is better, maybe good. i don’t know, either way. to just create a whole bunch until you get something really good. but in my case i wanted my book to be amazing to begin with and that's why it has taken so long and i've - like i said, i did practice i guess with writing blogs and i've edited it so much and i've read so many other books, so yeah, in my case i think i'm doing what's right for me.  but for maybe other people it is better to start younger and just keep at it.  keep creating and creating and creating.  and this is just my first book.  i'm going to have more, but - does that answer your question? : okay, i mean, i don't -  : well, if i've analyzed it by the criteria that i judge it by and i think it's good, then, then i, it's done and i'll have someone read it and give me some feedback. i've had that happen a few times, so. : yeah. i think i've been super paranoid. -laughs- so yes, i have.   : yeah, so i can move on.  because otherwise, i'd probably read it fifty times and then it just loses its meaning when you've read it fifty times anyways. : i think i spend a lot more time.  but i think going forward it would be maybe about the same.   : yeah, probably. : i produce less, but i think mine is really good, so, so i'm happy with it. : well, i don't want to say that i'm better than all of them. -laughs- a lot of them aren't doing it to be writers, they're doing it because they're want to tell a story, so, they're not writing a book. : yeah. : i was a theater major and i took improv for years and i think improv is just amazing like it really helps you unify things that you might never think are related. and when you're doing improv, you're having to think of the four major elements of story which are, you know, a setting, a definite setting, relationship, characters, and story arch. beginning, middle, and end. those four things, so i think it's like once you do those things enough, then you don't think about them and they kind of just come together and you're like, "oh, wow. i unified this whole thing at the end". and so, i did that for years and i really think that was amazing and helpful.  just making up stories on the spot, you know, every week.  just kind of training your mind to do that.  it was super fun too.   : yeah, yeah. i mean even though i didn’t get to go to school until i was like eleven, i... my dad really taught us critical thinking skills and in part it was for silly, you know, stupid reasons, because it's like everyone in the outside world is a systemite and we're god's chosen and everyone is a systemite, so he would criticize and analyze every little thing of society, you know. and even commercials on tv and everything.  so, because my dad was a - i guess they taught me to be a critical thinker in that regard, so, i would say that. like to see society as a whole, like every interaction or interactions between people, see them as a product of how they fit into this society which is kind of true and a lot of people don't think like that and i think i was taught to think that way.  i was also the oldest kid, so for example... one day i said to my dad "can i lick the lid of the peanut butter jar?"  and he said if i let you lick the lid then i have to let every kid in the house lick the lid.  so, everything i did i had to think in terms of the society of the household or the society of the world, you know, like so that i think has been helpful. because as a book you have to think of the overall thing, so it's kind of - and i think most people aren't really taught to think like that. : i think i'm distractible. -laughs- : if it's something i'm interested in then i'll really retain it. : sometimes.   : um, the uninhibited part, i think i'm - again, i think that i come up with really unconventional ideas and ways and so i really have to realize that - be aware of this society that i'm living in. : yeah. : i don't know.  sometimes i am i guess.  but, maybe not. : i'm trying to think of if i am, or examples... i guess i can be obsessive once in a while, i don't know. : no. : yes. : i feel like, uh, like i said, you know how with the good feedback i've gotten, i feel much more confident.   : so, i feel really good about it. : yeah, it's hard to say.  maybe yes.   : well, because it's like i said, i've changed kind of the way i think about myself. so... so yeah.  i don't know that's hard. : yes. mhm. : yeah, yeah.  well, and also i guess i thought that a lot of the stuff in the book that i'm writing is funny, and it is, but then there are also really tragic parts and i don't ever see my - i don't see myself as a victim at all, but to have people like, i don't know, almost see me that way when i read certain parts it's kind of bothersome because i, you know - because it's an identity thing and part of me, succeeding or surviving, has just been to see myself as strong and capable and then when people are like that it's kind of odd. it's kind of strange for me.  i mean i understand it on some level, but i don't know, it feels weird. so, i have to get used to that.  so maybe, yes.  maybe the answer is just yes. -laughs- : or maybe they're seeing it exactly as they should, but i'm seeing it differently because i lived it, like, i don’t know. : yeah, yeah. : yeah. we might have, we might have. just that i think that everyone has something that they can share with the world and that is the best thing for them to do.  no matter what it is, you know, being a doctor or whatever, an artist. and i think for me, that's what this is and... and i'm glad i'm doing it. : yeah, absolutely : wow : mhmmm : ummm i have to say uhh, just being a, uhhh well actually you know what i am most proud of? going vegan. : yeah, ummm i like for something really specific, i, it was the best decision i feel like for me lifestyle decision i ever made and i've always been compassionate about animals and the environment and actually doing something about it is um makes me feel really good and then in my health ummm shot up at the same time like i've met so many new people, you know when sometimes you're like in a conversation with someone and you're just like "uhh huhh uhh huh uh huhh" and you're not really interested in what they're saying but you're just kind of like nodding you know, and i've met so many people that i actually care about the conversations i'm having with them which is fantastic. umm but, can i say in addition to that? : because the first thing i was going to say was being a loving and giving person and family member and to my you know my mom, my sister. my dad when he was alive and my sisters i should say and my you know extended family and friends, my boyfriend- you know i mean that was, and my cats and pets that i've had in my life and umm animals i've cared for too, that was going to be the first thing i said. but then i was thinking of an action like a specific action that i actually took and that was going vegan and you know i'd say like rescuing cats was kind of part of that and kind of a catalyst that pushed me over to going vegan, so it was kind of like why am i so concerned with one species and not all of these other species that have it just as bad if not worse than cats or dogs you know so - : uhhh not exactly, in about 1998 or 99 i gave i decided i wasn't going to do red meat anymore and then pork and everything else went with it other than, i was only going to eat seafood, was going to be my only type of meat ummm but after let's say almost a year, i was a flight attendant at the time, and it was really hard to, i at the time i was under the impression like you really need protein with every meal, it was hard ummm to get fresh seafood and being from seattle i was kind of like picky about seafood and stuff and i ended up going back to eating poultry. so you know it wasn't until 2012 so 14-13-14 years later i watched a video and that's when i went vegan overnight pretty much. so to answer your question / : /i was still eating a little bit of meat, you know poultry and fish before but not beef or pork or anything else. : yeah and giving up dairy and eggs, i did love eggs in the morning, usually had an omelet- i was working on set, and they would make the omelets and i was like oh i can have an omelet you know and i had a lot of ate a lot of eggs you know, but um but when i learned about the cruelty of the dairy which i hadn't really thought of, i thought well you know it's probably not great, but i didn't think like what happens to a male calf when they're born, or umm you know what happens to male chicks when they're born and the conditions that they're kept in and the fact that they get slaughtered anyway, it makes their milk production, egg production fall off and it's much shorter than their natural life span would be its just the condition you know. cage free it's not really, yeah stuff like that so umm but it was [person 1]'s speech at [college 1] that um uhh a friend of mine recommended working on set with her and she was vegan and another guy wasn't but they both were like this is the best speech and i wasn't really even thinking oh this is a vegan speech or anything like that, i knew she was a big animal person, and we had bonded over that but they shoot grass-feeding animals as well, i didn't really know until i watched this speech that it was really like a, really you have all these reasons why you should go vegan then, you know and how we don't need, you know i always feel but like  oh it's unnecessary evil it's too bad but it's really needed meat, i always admired vegetarians but i never thought i could do it because i really thought it was healthier to eat meat, and we are carnivores and you know and then after listening to him talk about uhh how our bodies work and that we are not actually built like a carnivore, like a cat, it really opened my eyes so. : um my dad passing away for sure, ummm hands down uhh i still struggle with it, it was uhh a year and a half ago and i it's something that i still, i was just crying - well of course father's day - out of nowhere i kind of was just started bawling but i was just reading a text i sent to my step mom, because normally i would call my dad on father's day of course, and uh i texted her and i said some type of uhh "so i'm not calling you - in a different world i'd be calling my dad so i decided i would contact you being the woman who stood behind him and who you know supported him for so many years" and to let her know how much i appreciate her instead and she was really touched by that and uh. but then i was reading it to my boyfriend like "oh i just sent [step mom] a text" and so i start reading it to him and i couldn't even get through the first sentence i hadn't even said anything and i was just like "i can't" i had to put my phone down "i'll read it do you later". i just got choked up. i just couldn’t you know because he was such a wonderful father just the most loving and giving person i think i ever met i ever knew closely. not vegan –laughs- but supported my veganism and you know he would even call me none of my other family except my mom was just because she's probably where i got my love of animals from but anyways my sister or my stepmom who wouldn’t ever even consider saying happy mother's day to me for being a cat mom but my dad would always say happy mother's day to me when he was alive and he knew how hard i worked helping the animals and stuff so... i guess as far as overcoming i don’t know if i've completely overcome or ever will i don’t think i ever will i guess but i am i did you know i did i went and got this job i have now... while my dad was sick and i think i told you before that you know i got the job because i wanted flight benefits to be able to go up and see him when he was sick and he was you know gravely ill even though we didn't know exactly how ill it was pretty obvious he didn’t seem like he was getting better when we the cancer came back. and so i was able to go up and see him and spend some really fantastic time with him before we got the news that he only had about a week left and that’s in - i had just finished a shift at the airport i wasn’t going to come up that weekend she was like why don’t you take this weekend off and he had been in and out of the icu and i kept thinking i should come up, i should come up because i was working monday and friday you know i know i've been kind of needed a break but i'm going to go because i was i would literally finish my shift on friday fly up there be there for 2 nights and leave sunday morning to come back and it was like there's hardly any time but it was worth it because i was able to see my dad. and so you know kind of thought i'll take this weekend off and next weekend but i just had a feeling i was like i really feel like i should go up and when i finished my shift i had a text from my step mom saying you know you should talk to him. we feel like you should come up you know you should probably come up, and i knew - i mean i knew that they had gotten some bad news. we had just had x-rays and i knew you know so it was going to be not good news. i was just hoping that he was still conscious and i would get to spend some time with him. which he was. he was so witty and joking around until the end. i mean he was so strong and i was just losing him and suffer the hardest thing but i you know that’s how i ended up in the job i am now and position i'm in now opened up after he passed and i interviewed and got it and really poured my heart into my work. even though it's just an admin job i just really you know i guess i also just kind of wanted to escape the pain that i was you know i just really i'm proud of myself because i really you know i've worked hard got a good job still there and you know worked through it started seeing a counselor and it was offered free through work. and that really helped too just talking about it and stuff you know so definitely the hardest thing i ever had to overcome yeah for sure. : well its tricky because, yes it would be the answer over if you consider what i'm doing now my career but i don’t really consider it my career because to be quite honest, i am still kind of trying to figure out what i want to do when i grow up. -laughs- as you say that at 46 years old but i in the you know at first when i was back in the because it was an escape from the grave. i really and it was so nice to have a stable job again and a steady paycheck because i had been acting and doing odd jobs here nothing steady for 6 years before that.  so - and i thought oh gosh how can i ever live without benefits and a steady paycheck you know because it took so much stress off of me that way. now that it's been almost two years at this job i really my brains like i need something more challenging. so in a way yes that even did influence me being in my job now, but as far as considering a career i don’t now if i could consider it a career. and i'm not really sure i know i want to do something more creative. i'm starting to miss acting which i thought i was done with it oh well i've grown out of it but now i'm kind of missing doing it. and also i think i was so distraught for a while i didn’t feel like i was strong enough to perform in a capacity. i mean i just didn’t have the energy for it i was grieving. now i kind of feel like yeah i kind of like to do theater on the side you know maybe for not chasing a paycheck for it i think that kind of sucks your soul out of it but to do it for the love of it. you know i could see myself doing that still. : i think it’s the ability to create a character and to express myself and be one thing. and also i guess to touch people because i you know i really enjoy films and theater and the effect they have on me and just to you know i'm really interested comedy and sketch comedy because i'm really interested in laugh and i love making people laugh and i think saturday night live and things like that i find fantastically hilarious. and just really you know any time i'm feeling down a comedy will bring me out of it you know stuff like that. and i'd love to be able do it in the theater. i've done it in the past. i love the moments when the audience is laughing when you do something funny or you improv something funny and the audience laughs and it's like giving you love and i love all that. i think that the difference now that i've grown up a bit. before i used to do it for the need to do it. the desperation to do it. and then when i was doing film and a lot of background work, commercials i was doing it for the money more than the actually the love of it. now i feel like i've come to a place where i'd like to have a steady income and maybe the job i have now - it's not that bad. if i could keep doing that and then do the theater or writing, creating sketch comedy or something on the side. i think that would be a good balance for me so thinking about doing that - incorporating that you know and not being so desperate for this. now i just want to do it for the love of it, not for the desperation of it. not that i have to do it but i want to do it   : yeah, yeah. i would say be yourself for one thing. don’t worry about what other people think. some people are going to love you some people are going to hate you. i know i fell into the insecurity trap after i got here and i just i even started to color my hair the way i thought, for the roles, i thought that i would be most likely to get. and that wasn’t the kind of hair that i wanted you know. i want to have red hair sometimes or blond hair sometimes you know purple hair sometimes. but in who cares if they don’t want to put me in that role because of my hair or whatever. it's just like i just want to be myself and you know love myself for who i am and not care what other people think. and that's the advice i would give to people starting out. don’t worry about what other people think. if your asian doesn’t like your asian. do it for the love of it, not for the "because you want to be rich and famous". because you may get rich and famous but it'll suck your soul away. : um...for? : for theater. i would say many but - um because you never know who is - i mean as far as close friends i would say few but for career would say many. but also be careful who you trust. keep a note. i would say many. keep an open mind you never know um who's going to love your work so i guess the more people who see it the better chance you have of success. the more people you interact with and you never know, you know someone might have a lighting business and can if you can offer you lighting if you're putting on a show. who knows. or who can do flyers for your theater show or something like that, or costumes you never know who can help you out. and that's not to say meet people just to use them but you know you have a connection and you can help each other out maybe they want to do that. maybe they’ve been dying to do wardrobe for a theater show and you know. so i say many for that reason. yeah. : i think they're great but i think - you mean many or few? : i think peers are definitely important because especially with the something like theater or film or hollywood acting, they'll just eat you alive if you don’t have a good support system. um so definitely you want peers, a lot of peers, but peers are good as long as they don’t bring you down. as long as they keep you positive. you know the business is negative enough, you don’t need negative people around you. so if someone is not, you know, doesn’t love you for who you are, is not helping you grow, is not supporting you, get rid of them. you don’t need them in your life, you know. but positive - yes positive peers are very valuable. mentors i have a hard time with. i think its great to have a mentor if you really - that really keep you on track and really guide you, you know, where you want to go. but again be careful because i've seen mentors that have become more like curio worshipped people. and - they get sort of either repeating - either mimicking their - what their mentor has and done and not doing what they want to do or, you know, kind of getting into this "i'm not worthy" kind of trap. kind of like they're underneath someone or something. so i would say yes its important but be careful -laughs-. : i would say early but be able to adapt, because you're constantly growing and changing. and the characters i would play now are different, not just in age and socio-economic status or you know things like that, also in just who i am, you know. i've traveled. i know so much more, you know. the things i know versus the things i knew then - or things that i believe now have changed too. my mind is more open than it ever was in the past. and i would imagine it’s the same with everyone to whatever degree, you know. the person you are twenty years from now is not going to be the same person you are now. your essence will still be the same but - so it also depends on what type of craft you want to do, you know. some people have a very specific persona, and it's great for them. other actors, you know, have played every character under the sun or a million and you don’t even know its them. and that’s great for their career too. it just depends on what direction you want to go. for me - and then i - then there's me who's still kind of trying to find my identity, i guess. but knowing who you are, whoever that person may be, is very important. and being confident in who you are. even if you're you know an insecure school girl be confident that about insecure school girl you know when you go into the audition. um so yeah. : focusing on leading ideas or working in the periphery? can you / : different ideas as far as like how to break in to the business? or as far as? : okay, gotcha. i would say definitely always be in class. because you always need to be exercising your muscles so to speak, just like an athlete exercises certain muscles, certain training for their - they do - it’s the same thing with acting. you always need to be exercising your acting muscle and stretching - pardon the pun - in new ways in class. and just when you think you nailed something that’s when you need to learn something else, because you can never get complacent or your work. it's just going to be boring. you might say all the right lines at all the right times, but there isn't going to be the depth of the character there. so yeah that’s what i would say for first and foremost, stay in class. even if it’s a - or it doesn’t even have to mean a formal class. get together with some friends and read some scripts or something. but constantly be exercising that muscle. also something that i never would of known when i was younger - actors are much more interesting if they have outside interests. so don’t just be about acting. you know, be 90% acting but 10% be - do something different. go hiking, learn how to garden, you know, learn how to build a house, or do a side job, or something where you're - i guess it's kind of deepening who you are, but it makes you more interesting as an actor as well, because everything inside you will come out in whatever character you're playing. so if you don’t know much other than acting, if you're living breathing acting that character will be the same thing as i was saying before. it's going to be so stale. really, you know. so be a full whole person, you know. : because it brings people joy. really. i mean think about how many movies touch your life you know. some people aren't necessarily into theater but everyone watches tv or sees movies you know. or goes to plays or even i guess you could kinda branch out and say music or you know song and dance or some kind of performance, perhaps maybe just not acting. but i mean we all love to be entertained right. so its huge. its hugely important and not important and the same time. its not a necessity in life but think of where we'd be without it  : yes absolutely  : i was just discovered. i - when i was 5 years old i was. my father he was a ventriloquist and he was performing for a grand opening of a pizza parlor near [city 1] where i grew up. and the night before the grand opening they were rehearsing with the performers, and their families were invited for a pre grand opening event. so we were having a pizza party for the friends and family of the workers. so i was sitting there with my mom and my sister and i was eating my pizza backward. i was holding it from the tip and eating the crust you know because it was just fun to eat it that way. and they were the people that were shooting the commercial came up and they, you know, it was just a local commercial for the grand opening. and they came up and asked if they could use me in the commercial. my mom was like "do you want do it?" and i was like "for sure" and that kind of birthed my love of performing because i loved being on camera and i was only 5 i didn't know what was going on. i just loved that i was in the commercial. and i got into dance after that, and my dance studio did few commercials as well some local commercials. i did a bunch of local commercials growing up and i was always was in acting class, in school doing plays, and everything. i just loved the thrill and my dad would actually take me dancing and doing song and dance and little acts on camera too when i was growing up. we had i think the world's first video camera was like black and white. cost like a thousand dollars i think. that came with our vcr but - back in the 70s. but so yeah so that’s how it started for me. : -participant drinks water- its funny that you say that because i think i have tried my whole life to not do it. you know i went - graduated high school, went to college, graduated with honor. i actually had a scholarship - a full ride scholarship to college based on academics. when i got there i was teaching dance. i wasn’t doing too much acting until after i graduated because i was like oh i have to get a real degree and get a real job and i can do theater on the side but you know you need to have a real job first. so i got my real job, did theater on the side, and then i think that’s - i can't remember if i told you or somebody else. i had no time for myself. i was looking for another job and that’s when my friend suggested being a flight attendant. i was like okay sounds like fun. and all i could think about was how i wanted to get back to acting. so i started taking some classes in [city 2]. that’s how i started getting into film. i hadn't really done film. i did tons of theater but hadn't done film really since i had done commercials when i was young. so and then my acting teacher was like film is much more lucrative. o i ended up being a flight attendant because it was hard to do theater with rehearsals and everything. so it was much easier to do film. you just have a couple days off to do shifts. so i started doing more film and then that’s when i met my boyfriend who's an actor too. we moved back here together. and uh i ended up quitting my job to try to do acting, and then you know 6 years later i was like i fell into that insecurity trap where i was just constantly worried about what people think. i guess i always questioned my decision to quit my job kind of thing. i was like oh this is i have no money this is so hard. but um then i got my real job you know okay everything's great now. that this is totally out of my system and everything. it is now almost two years later and now i'm like i want to do it again. just when i, you know, i've tried everything to get away from it. i tried being a sales manager that didn’t work. i tried being a flight attendant that didn’t work. and so here i am again. : um... my dad um did a lot when i was growing up because he was ventriloquist. he also built ventriloquism dummies, but he also performed. and so i think definitely he influenced my love of performing. uh a lot of - someone - well i guess my boyfriend now who as much as i think he's crazy and can't understand why he still wants to do this for a living, i also admire the fact that he's persistent about it. and i have to admit that it's still in me too. and he's been just a great support for me because he understands why i have to do it. so there are a lot of people that have influenced me not necessarily in a good way. um like... some of my agents or even my one of my acting teachers in new york who sort of scammed us out of money, and i've been scammed out of money few times. not as bad as some people. but that was very eye opening for me because i think i'm sort of loving trusting person, and kind of naïve sometimes. and it's hard to understand why people would want to do that to someone, you know. but you live and learn. i think also that kind of is part of the reason i shied away from it and was reluctant to sort of jump in, all in, when i was just not doing anything else. and i was always looking for other jobs because i was sort of scared i guess. but now i'm in a good place where i’m confident that i can make smart decisions, and trust myself to make decisions. i don’t even remember what the original question –laughs- one who has influenced me. i went off on a tangent. : be careful who you trust. surround yourself with supportive people don’t - someone can give you a critique - constructive criticism is fantastic...-coughs- but people that don’t believe in you don’t have any place in your life...-coughs- yeah and uh you know, just stay strong. don’t let anybody push you around. don’t let anybody make you do something you don’t want to do. even if it's in the contract and you're not comfortable with it, don’t do it. no amount of money is worth selling you dignity -coughs-. sorry. do you need more? : um... i don’t know about right now because i'm sort of looking at getting back into it myself. but eventually, i'd like to mentor. or you know teach a theater class or something. i think that would be great, yeah. : um... i think it's pretty hard to tell for sure. because there are a lot of talented people out there. um and not near - a very small percentage is going to be successful or stay with it long enough to be successful. so the people that are persistent, and you know that’s really what it is its persistence i think. even more than talent or who do you know it's just keeping at it constantly. : for sure yeah. : well as far as - well for one thing, men have it much easier than women. its less competitive for men. but... i think in general - i think men are not as insecure as women. i don’t know if it's because it's something that’s based on the look a lot. what you look like. i'm talking about more film than theater. as far as film, women are judged on their looks already so much more than men in this world. so i think women tend to be more insecure about that. women i think are, not all, but you know i think women tend to be more competitive and be sort of i don’t know if i can say bitchy, or catty about it. in general. i mean there's good and bad on both sides, you know. i've met some wonderful female friends through the years, and you know guys too, you know. i think guys sometimes they're not as smart about it either. i think women are - in this field are more - they know what they want they have a plan. and then some guys do too. i think guys tend to get luckier in getting parts and stuff than females do. because a lot of times they are harder to find so their chances are better, and sometimes just fall into things while women really have to put themselves out there, and really have to have a plan and goals in order to make it in the film world more so than theater. : um well it’s the same thing. i think women... tend to be judged more than men. even successful women. and they don’t make as much money. so i think its kind of the same thing as - you know. i think women have to have a lot more going on. have to be a lot smarter and more confident and you know. men do too, but i think i think it’s the same kind of thing more men kind of get lucky than women in the sense. : that’s a really good question. umm... you have to have a private life. you have to have... be able to maintain your privacy. especially in this field because if you do happen to achieve a little bit of fame, even a small amount, it can drive you crazy. you have to know who you are. it goes back to everything i was saying before. you have to know who you are. be yourself, but you know don’t mistake your public persona for who you really are because that’s not who you really are, you know. because there is so much phony baloney that goes on its ridiculous. it really is. and if you know famous actors and actresses, that image you know may not be anything like who they are in real life. so it's very important more than any other field even that you know who you are and do not - and stay grounded. because if you do you know make it, if you become famous that can go to your head. and vice versa same thing if you don’t make it still you have to know who you are stay strong in yourself be confident. that doesn’t matter. all that stuff is extra stuff. it's all fake, you know. someone can hate your performance but it doesn’t mean you’re a bad person, you know. so, very important. : real life, but also with my imagination. like, i'm just thinking of creating characters, things that i've written tend to be characters based on real life. but with a twist usually. maybe people i kind of already know but will be exaggerated in some way for the sake of art. but also reading for a part, you know, or creating a character for a part that i didn’t write. it’s the same thing you're drawing from your real experiences and it's always you. there's always a part of you in each character that you create. and that’s again why it's so important to have other interests outside of acting because if you're playing a waitress you have no idea what it's like to be a waitress, or you know - or you know something like that you're not going to be very convincing. but all that experience that you have in life i think goes into every character that you - your essence so to speak. : um i'd say intuition is extremely important. knowing what choices to make instinctively. i'm thinking about when you're performing as a character, and it's hard to explain, but you sort of get to a place where you don’t really think about what you're doing, you just do it. and when you intimately know the character you're creating that well, it's so much fun to just sort of observe what your character's doing and not be thinking about what you're doing. if that makes sense. i think that’s intuition is part of that. also playing off the other person, you know. also just having like again with the agents and meeting people. there's a lot of shady people in the business who just want to use you to make money off of you. so trusting your gut in those situations... extremely important. rational i don’t know. in this business, i mean of course you want to have a decent amount. but i don’t know. honestly sometimes i think it's better to be irrational. because i know i fell into the trap of trying to plan everything and you do have a solid, you know, business plan if that’s what you're going for. but just really overthinking everything, which is destruction. it's awful for the acting business to overthink it. because it's not what people do, you know. it's not how you create a character. basically - i mean you think about it when you're creating the character but you don’t want to rationalize "well should i do this here or do this here", you know. and maybe it's different for other people, but for me, because i tend to have that side that you know sort of enforces all my decision anyway, you know i need to be the other way. to be the "let loose go with my intuition". i mean go with my gut - i mean how many times were you like i should've trusted my gut. so especially in this business it's very important, yeah.  :  oh yeah. all the time. yeah, yeah. : oh yeah. : yeah well you go into like - well unless you're doing a re-occurring tv show or something like that, doing a theater show or doing your film is a very intense period of creation, and sorry what was the question again? : oh it's very intense period of creation. so when you're in that world, you know, your things are always coming up. you're always growing and building and expanding and deepening the character. and i imagine it’s the same when you're on a tv show as well. if it's on for season after season after season you're going to find out more about that character as you go on. so - but once it's done, you know, once the show is done, once the film wraps, then you kind of put that character to rest. unless you'll be able to pick it up again later, during the time of creation it's kind of like an all-consuming thing. you know you do definitely want to have balance, but artists tend - i think it's - but the balance usually comes after its over if that makes sense. during that time, the insights and everything are usually coming during that time that you're doing the creation. not so much after its done if that makes sense. and then artists tend to have really intense creation and then down time where they don’t do anything. like literally you're laying in bed for days, because you're so spent from this energy you expended. you're literally creating a life from nothing, you know. if that makes any sense. but i know it's kind of off of what the question was. but so... also when you're -  i think you know let's say i was shooting something here where i go home and night after but it's such an intense period of creation that probably in my sleep that night i'll wake up in the morning and be like "oh my god". especially i'd say it's even more so for writing, because you can get you know writers blocks and when you're trying to churn out pages you just gets stuck. but then you go to bed and wake up in the morning and are like "uhh that’s what it is what's what she needs to do" or "that's what's missing from the story". so, it’s the same kind of thing when you're building a character too. especially rehearsal after rehearsal and something you just know somethings not right. it doesn’t feel right and then you let it go for a minute, maybe go have some coffee, whatever, go out to eat, and then it comes to you when you're not thinking about it. so yes. does that make sense? : umm usually like 5 to 6, unfortunately. i wish it was more but - : yeah. well also i wake up in the middle of the night a lot. so - which sucks because i tend to fall asleep early but then i'll wake up, i don’t know, around midnight. and sometimes i'll be up until 3 in the morning, and manage to get back to sleep for a couple more hours but it usually it shortens my sleep for quite a bit  : umm... my best rational work? early in the morning. my best creative work? late at night. : um... just like - you're talking about my insights and things? they usually just come to you like - and then you just build on it. usually it'll be on like some little idea. like i was just writing a children's book and it started with my sister. i was saying like these ideas and characters are usually based on real life. so it - my younger sister i think felt like she's somewhat in my shadow a little bit. she was - when were younger she used to feel that way. i was the cheerleader in high school got good grades. she did too but her grades weren't quite as good as mine, stuff like that. i mean even though she was 7 years younger, even though we weren't in the same school, she kind of felt a little bit like "oh [sister] get all the glory" kind of thing. well so i wrote a children's book. fairy - a fairy - literally a fairy tale about fairies based on this fairy named after my sister, who's living in her in her sister's shadow –laughs- in the fairy kingdom. what was the question again? -laughs- : oh that sorry i got to finish up. so yeah so anyway that was one example of - but that how i really it comes "ohh it'll be like oh my sister is this" and then i'll see a picture of a fairy or something. who knows be like "oh like what if we were fairies". some ideas literally fizzle the next moment, you know. but some of them you keep going with and who knows, you know, i'm still working on that one. :  good question. it just depends really on what it is. and you know from worrying about myself i don’t know. it's not like i published anything. so i feel like - i feel like i'm redrafting everything that i'm working on. it's like it's never finished. maybe depending on what it is i'd say maybe two or three times like for a children's story. but i'm writing a full-length film with my boyfriend and another friend right now and we haven't even finished the first draft yet -laughs-. i don’t really know how to answer that but - : i used to more. like i used to really be more concerned with the outcome of it. like oh if i really want this effect - really the only goal is to touch people and it used to be my goal "oh i want this film to show these people -". you're sort of like teach a lesson but not you know. preach to people but just kind of like find the meaning. i had the - i mean those are the films i like to watch like "ohh and the moral of the story is - ". you know, so i used to always want to do stories that had sort of a moral to them or taught a lesson you know. showed people if you do this uh its like oh "be kind". but now that i've gotten older, i think those aren't always the kind of things that are the most interesting, or the obvious lessons aren't - don’t interest me that much anymore. plus i've seen so many films by now that have the same sort of lesson. i think its more interesting to have sort of ambiguity now. its more realistic. but just to touch people to effect people in some way. bringing them joy would be the best outcome. and just - and now i'm also more concerned about what i think about something. i used to always be such a people pleaser. i cared what everybody else thought that what i thought wasn’t as important. and now i'm like i want to love it too. i just really want -as long as i love it it’s the most important thing. : for writing i would say just taking a break. just if it's not coming - because with creativity like you - it just comes and it grows and just keeps building and you don’t even notice the time, and you're not hungry you're not thirsty. you know you just keep going because you're building something and it's just growing and it's just so fantastic when you're in those – the flow. that’s exactly what - when you're in the flow and it's like you just know, and you feel it. and whether you're working alone or with other people it's just going, going, going. and you can't - and it's almost like it's not even you. it's coming from outside of you and you can't stop it. but then other times when your writers block or you're just maybe or maybe you're in rehearsal and there's, you know, your scene is not working. it's not feeling right. everyone can feel it. i think in either case really drop it. do something else. if maybe you can't stop the rehearsal just do an exercise. do something completely different, you know. do an exercise. i know a lot of times in acting we do things that are totally unrelated to the script, like or we'll do an improv just with our character in a totally different scene that's not in the script, or something like that. or something completely different with different characters just to bring yourself out of it so you can get back in it and refresh. same kind of thing with writing. even more so. you just get that block and you're like now i'm stuck. i'm not growing up, i'm not anything, and that’s when you just need to do something completely entirely different. : i think it can happen from overthinking it. being too rigid. not just like letting it go. trying to hone it in when it just needs to be just released. like maybe you're writing something and you start thinking "wait a minute. what, what, what if this person doesn't like it? or is that a good idea? or what if i offend these people? or what -" you know, again i'm really caring what other people think. umm i mean you have to to some degree if you're doing it for money. you have to - and if you have an audience, you have to think about that audience to some degree. right? if you're writing a movie and you don't want it to be r you want it to be pg-13 -laughs- you know, you're going to have to think about it. and i guess that's more where editing comes in, and i think if you're trying to edit while you're creating, i think that can get you stuck. umm, on neg- yeah just negative thoughts in general i think can really keep you stuck. umm but if you're true to yourself and not care what other people think, at least during the creation process, umm then i think those are the best ways to keep it moving and keep it - just, just go with it, just you know. : uhhh it could be like all day i mean umm, how much time per day? or how much time/ : i'd say when you're really in it, can be like 12 hours a day. umm i think i spend even more than that. but i'd say average, well, maybe yeah. for writing definitely. for acting, umm maybe not as much. i think mostly because you're usually rehearsing with other people, or um. with acting i'd say it’s a little bit less, it's probably like 6 maybe on average. : yeah, it's just it's really cause it's so diverse, it's hard to really ummm. so like you're talking about not just during the day but like how many days? : umm, it's hard to say. for writing i'd say it's almost like one week on one week off. : umm on average, umm for acting it can be anything. i mean depending what you're doing. like theater, you rehearse, depending on what show you're doing, pretty much every day. umm i'd say it was like three to four weeks rehearsal and, you know, then followed by a few months run usually. and that would usually be thursday, friday, saturday, sunday shows. umm with monday, tuesday, wednesday off or something like that. some of the shows were like 6 nights and you only get one day off. : yeah. umm and then for film it can be anything- depending on the length of the film, it just depends on the length of the shoot. but umm, i never did like a full-length film where i was the star, my part was usually not that much –laughs- . but umm so i'd say we'd each have like a week maybe for a short film... and yeah i mean i never - i never really worked on anything more than 2 weeks in a row i'd say. i mean straight, ya know.  : umm i usually try to make one day a week just for leisure. but i'm not always successful because umm if an idea comes to me i have to go with it, so. : umm if an idea comes to me? uhh like i said before depends on how long -laughs- uhh it really varies. umm but i'd say three to four hours on average maybe. but then you know like i was saying before, i mean if it's a really good idea, like i can - it can be up to 12 hours you know. so it really just depends. : umm i'm not sure i understand.  : uhh huhh, right. umm yeah i, well i mean it seems like that would kind of be obvi- well you know what i don't know if i really believe that because, i mean. it's kind of like the law of averages i guess. but then you hear about like... well honestly i don't know. like then you hear about, for acting, a lot of people got lucky. it's like "this is their first film!" or this is - so i'd say in most fields that's probably true, umm and it makes sense because you're just, the more you put out there, the more chance that someone is going to see it and buy it and like it. but umm in acting especially and for writing i'd say that's probably true as well, but for acting like a lot of it is just being in the right place at the right times. but you know, then again, persistence. i guess yeah, i guess, i guess i buy it.  : umm it's never done.  : always, yeah. : umm like i said in the past it was more, if other people liked it, it would be more the feedback from other people. i'd be like "oh do you think that they'd like it? will it get good reviews?" but now, if i like it, like that's the most important thing. it took me a long time to get here, a long time.  : again, that's a really hard question because everyone's process is so different. i'd say less just because i don't, i have that much time to do it, with my other jobs so, i'd say less probably ummm. what was the question again -laughs- ?  : i'd say less probably. definitely right now because my situation with the other job, umm... and yeah and also just because it's just for fun now really. as before, you know, before it was really like i need a pay check -laughs- so - does that answer your question? : mhmm : wow. umm, i have no idea –laughs-. umm it probably just, i don't really- ummm. i don't know what the process is. i think it's just kind of - well i'm very visual, so i think i do a lot of things umm visually. like that's kind of how i remember, like i make all these notes for myself because that's how i remember to do things. so umm yeah, like for the, going back to the fairy story, i was thinking about something my sister had said, and then i saw a fairy, so that kind of - so i'd say cause i always seem to be thinking about something. so whatever i'm thinking about i guess i kind of pair it with something i see maybe, does that make sense? : um but as far as thoughts in my head? like how would i -? : i think definitely because i'm like, i notice, i'll be like "why am i thinking about that?" it's like "oh because i saw that today" -laughs-. i'm really, really super visual to the point of where, when i'm eating like my food has to be neat. random off topic, but that' s just to give you an example of how visual i am. i'm very about visual aesthetics or whatever so i guess i'm constantly noticing things visually? i don't know, does that make sense at all –laughs-? : i can be both, yeah, for sure. umm uhh yeah for sure. i can, like i said i'm very visual, so i get distracted by visuals a lot. but if i'm really focused on something -. in fact now that you mention it, if someone is trying to get my attention and i'm really really focused on writing or on the computer or whatever, umm the best way they can get my attention is to put something in front- like make me see something. because a lot of times if they're just like talking to me and i'm really focused, i won't hear what they're saying. so umm they held like a big sign in front of me, that would get my attention much better, which i mean is probably true for everybody. : really? : so yeah, i don't - what was the question? : yeah, both definitely.  : umm i used to, i used to have a really good memory. i think it's still pretty good, umm but i definitely have noticed as i've gotten older that you know, things like names of people i should know. it takes me a while to recall more now, but. even still i think i, i have a pretty good memory umm. again visually, like spelling things like that, you know, i really noticed if something's misspelled. i'm able to find errors in proofreading things and so i'd say better probably than average. : yeah notes, sticky notes. uhhh sticky notes, and i usually start out with the list but i don't always follow it, i get distractible -laughs-. umm yeah but definitely like umm sticky notes and reminders and umm, i like to just sort of write things down, so i don't forget, just on a piece of paper. you know i'll write it down if i don't have time to deal with it right away. just make sure that i have them all in a little notebook. umm so when i have time to get to it later, i can get to it, i won't forget you know. there have been a few ideas that i didn't write down, and i'm like aarrrrrr, they're gone forever -laughs-. umm what else... mmmm, tools to help, i guess with writing maybe a thesaurus, thesaurus, however you say it. umm although, well yeah, now cause i don't recall the words as well as i used to. so it's like kind of, a thesaurus definitely helps sometimes with the words. but i, i still say that's rare though even that i need that, but umm. : mmmm not really. maybe on a rare occasion.  : umm i'd say both. umm i think i tend to be more, well, it's really. it depends on what group i'm in. i'd say more than the general population, i'd say more uninhibited, and - but with other actors i'd say more inhibited. does that make any sense –laughs-? : yes. : in general, yeah. : umm not really, but i think i am to a certain degree. umm but not with anything huge like huge undertak - or risky or, you know. i'm impulsive like i'm probably going to go get a vegan donut from whole foods on my way home. -laughs- you know what i mean? like that's my - i'm not impulsive like i'm going to go sky diving today or, you know. : compulsive... can you clarify? : oh kind of like ocd, i mean not ocd, but, umm compulsive. i don't think so. i don't think i really am. umm... you mean like you're - like you're kind of driven to\ : oh, um, you mean like make sure the coffee maker is off? i don't think i really am, maybe a little bit, umm i'm trying to think. i guess like i do you know check my makeup at work, at my office job, again it's the visual thing, like i get scared like my mascara is running or something. umm i'd say more than the average person i probably like in fact people tease me because there's a mirror - but i don't like use it that much but it came with the desk, and because i am visual and i'm very aware of how i'm presenting myself to people. umm and so i will check a lot to make sure my like lipstick is on right or something like that. but that's probably about as compulsive- oh sometimes with cleaning a little bit. i actually am kind of, like with washing dishes now that you mention it, i like to make sure they're really clean. i don't stop until there's not a spec, you know. : oh, no but i think i have some of the symptoms of it, a little bit. um - : -laughs- umm well i mean i think it's important, not just for me, but for everyone, i think everyone has a story to tell and i think it's important that we all tell our story in whatever means, you know whatever vehicle that you want to present it in, whether it's through writing or acting, or whether it's through research, you know, being a doctor, helping people, or kill people, or whatever it is. i think it's important to let it out. for me acting and writing umm and performing are all about telling a story. umm not necessarily my story but in telling other people's stories, with me it is part of telling my story -laughs- does that make sense? : yes, yeah, exactly. exactly, yeah. so um because i think i mean we're here for a limited amount of time and this was something that my dad passing also taught me is life is short, it really is. and if there's something you want to do you just got to do it. so i'm really happy that my uhh creative side is - well my creative side started emerging and i was still writing. but i'm happy that that performing side is coming back to me now because now when i go back to do it - i think when my dad passed away i felt like a part of me died with him and i've, and since my desire - like i felt like my desire to perform sort of died with him too. but now i'm realizing that i was just going through grief and that part of me, that performing side is me. it's not my dad, it's you know, me. and he's gone you know, but it's still with me. so now it's more important more than ever for me to get it out, ya know, does that make sense? : thank you, for sure. i'm an open book –laughs-.  : umm. that’s a tough question -laughs- to start off the bat with. um, i think i'm proud of the fact that i've tried so many different things and my path hasn’t been conventional. so i think that’s something really cool that i'm proud of.  : yeah. my career and like i started off you know- getting my bachelors and then i graduated and decided to be a chef instead, and i traveled a lot with that experience and um, then i went back to school and now i'm a restaurant manager but i've just not taken the traditional nine-to-five path and i think its offered me a lot of really cool experiences.  : umm i think it, a lot of it is support, family support of um. just its ok not to be a, not to have that normal nine-to-five job and knowing that i have, someone there to help me if things do fall through or whatever umm- yeah.  : its mostly emotional cause i've like been on my own for a long time financial but a little bit of it is financial, like if i needed it, i know that someone is there for me, so.  : um i had a pretty difficult childhood with the alcoholic parents and um we moved around a lot, so that was um really difficult to, cause i didn't have the normal childhood that i guess a lot of kids have, and no one's normal, but that was difficult to overcome i think. i didn't have the same roots that a lot of people had, so.  : yeah, um its really about forming other connections that can provide that same support um or like, you know, when my mom finally did become sober, like forgiving her and getting over it and moving on.  : um. yeah i mean my career has kind of taken a few turns through the years, um but when um i went back to school to get my masters, that just changed a lot of things for me, not only my path in terms of what exactly job i was doing but also the connections i made there, the people, it just has continued to be good for me so.  : in my career? : um well kinda totally changed direction like i went from thinking that i wanted to, i was a chef that i thought i wanted to open my own restaurant and i needed a business degree to do that successfully and then i came out and i started working front of house of a restaurant and it totally changed what i thought i wanted to do. i don't want to own a restaurant anymore, but i, i'm now more of in a consulting pathway and its offering me so much more freedom, it's so much more challenging in a lot of different ways than either front or back of house is separately um so it's just been-you know really good.  : yeah definitely. um, i'm, i kinda of am in a place of transition and um i have a job that’s really flexible, it's more of a consulting job, so it lets me kind of take projects on as they come and its really just like putting my feet in the water where exactly where i want to go, because hospitality is such a huge industry and there's so many different things to do so it's been really good for me to have that opportunity and try new things. work with different people. : um i would say don't get into debt –laughs-. um - i mean - it's hard to say don’t go back to school because it was definitely so worthwhile, but looking at people who don't have that debt carrying over them is, you know i feel like you can get a lot of what you need just by working and making the right connections, so.  : oh totally. um. i mean the core is still there. like when i first started as a chef like, you don't need to go to cordon bleu, you don't need to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars to cook in a kitchen because you don't even know if it's a right job for you, because it's such a hard job. um but, you know i- so the core of that is still the same. i think that i, i would say a degree is only as valuable as you can make it, you know, and if its gonna to put you into financial debt then it might not necessarily be worth it or find a different way to get that degree.  : um i think that, you know, my career, i've changed, i would say that specialization is not necessarily important because you're going to be changing your career several times like throughout your lifetime so there's always going to be opportunities to do something different so do what you love you know and have fun with it, don't like, school is so fun and i learned that even more going back, don't waste your time on something that you don't love –laughs-.  : um... i guess i don’t understand the question.  : oh like why should other people do what i do? : umm. i think you should only do it if you love it cause it’s a really hard lifestyle. hospitality um, even consulting offers a little more normal hours but if you don't love it, it's gonna drive you to a very dark place. -laughs- um it’s a lot of hard hours and the pay is not that good and all those things but if, i like the consulting aspect better because it offers a better quality of life for better pay and so now that i've kind of built up all this experience i can do that um, but there are definitely a lot of times i wish i'd gone down a different path. so.  : it's kind of like it, i love doing it and i'm really good at it um, but it's also a little bit of fear, like i feel like it's too late to start over and i already have, you know, going back and getting a masters. i have a lot of debt from that so i feel like i can't go back and go back to school to do something else because that would just be crazy –laughs-, and then starting over at the bottom somewhere else, i wouldn't be able to make the money that i need to make and stuff like that so.  : yeah definitely um i have um a, great mentor from one of my previous jobs um and even though i don't work for him now, he's always, we meet up pretty frequently and he's still, you know, someone i can always go to and ask for advice even if it's just from like what should i do in this situation at work or like trying to figure out the bigger picture of where i'm trying to go.  : um, he's like very supportive and when i worked for him, he was the hardest boss i ever had and sometimes i would hate him -laughs- but it was because he demanded you know, perfection and um i recognized at the time we had a good relationship at the time but since i don't work for him anymore we still continued this relationship and it's just been like he's so good at what he does and it's just been great to have his input you know.  : no, he like. we’ve both since left the company we worked for and he's starting his own restaurants and um, so yeah. : definitely. um, i think that one of my best qualities as a boss or leader is to coach people along and get better, you know some people come in and they just want to be a server, come in clock out whatever and get money but then other people like my restaurant managers under me or supervisors, a lot of people want to run their own restaurant one day and things like that so trying to teach them how to be a better manager.  : its um, everyone has their own distinct style for sure but um, i am kind of a coaching and in the trenches kind of person. i believe that, if, when people see you acting the right way and doing the right thing, um they learn from that as well. um, but i also think it's important to like, help people create strategies of how they are going to be better managers and how they're gonna recognize different peoples' traits to make them work better together as a team. so just helping people recognize those, you know, like look out for the people that work stronger as a team or this server might work better alone and how do you recognize that and what do you once that happens, is it ok for you to let them do that, you know.  : um i feel like i'm a pretty good judge of character. um- yeah. i think that, not very many people have surprised me by being successful if i thought they weren't going to be. but there's also, like i said, so many different um types of jobs in hospitality that just because they're not successful in like the michelin star restaurant doesn't mean they’re not gonna be a really great like chipotle's manager, you need a different type of person for that, you know. the person who's a good manager of a, like, five star restaurant is not gonna be the same person that runs an appleby's or whatever, and those are, you know necessary restaurants too. so.  : yeah totally. i think like you know the five start restaurants you have to have a very high um attention to detail and um being able to manage multiple projects all at the same time um and very high sense of urgency um and you have to have like really fine people skills um because you interact with a lot of very wealthy clients or you know especially in [city 1] its um, it gets complicated. and then you have all your servers as well who in [city 1] are actors, they're very dramatic, and you're trying to like deal with them as well. um, and you kind of have to be a workhorse, there's just no turning it off, its 80 hours a week. um but for a more casual restaurant, um... you have to manage a, i would say a lower level of talent, like your servers are gonna be more like normal servers you know and they’re not gonna be wanting, they might be like supporting family or whatever and you have to um, manage that a little bit better and try to improve them but it's not gonna be the same level as your five star restaurant. and it terms of the mangers themselves, it's like they’re gonna do that because they want a quality of life and they might be good with people but it's not gonna be at the same level as um the people in the five star restaurant if that makes sense.  : its um grown incredibly more important. -laughs- yeah, i used to um, work you know eighty hours a week and think that it was completely ok to invest my whole self in my job and it was okay um for a while but then you lose friends and you alienate people because you're never available for any of the celebratory things in life and you’re always working. um and that got to a point where it's really lonely lifestyle, your best customer is not your friend, and they might act like it but they're, you know your customer at the end of the day. and so i kind of... realized that sometimes you have to create more boundaries for your own sanity and health.  : i would say-um if you want balance, demand it, um find the right position, the right company, that’s going to let you go home and not answer your cell phone twenty four hours of the day, not be like answering emails twenty four hours of the day, and have it be an open conversation that that’s ok, you know but you have to actively tell, you know set those boundaries for your boss and your even your um the people working for you um and you still take care of your job of course but you have to set the boundaries that- that’s, you have a personal life or else no one will give it to you –laughs-. : um... i think a few coworkers for sure or like close colleagues have influenced my professional identity. i think you can’t help but learn things from everyone that you meet and that you work with so... yeah. : i think um like i had one colleague from my last job that i still keep in touch with and she um just makes me look at things in different ways and like you don’t have to take the same path that everyone will take. but i have a colleague um at my current job that has really changed things cause she has taken a much different track than i have, like i, you know, i went, back to school to get my masters whatever, and she has worked at this one job or two jobs for her whole life, single mother, things like that. but she's also the most generous hardworking person um, so i learn a lot from her everyday of like-you know sometimes want to let things go when i wouldn't, um and then went to, you know, just admire her work ethic and working at a crazy place and how hard she works.  : um i was a reader, so i read a lot. um... and then you know.... just like riding my bike along with my brother, stuff like that. (18:47) : i have two. i'm the middle, yeah.  : um. yeah. definitely my sister uh, is a writer, i would say she used to want to write fiction but now she's kind of gone off into a little bit of a different career, um which is really good for her but she's definitely creative. and my brother has always been creative, you know.  : yeah. um. i think in my early childhood, it was kind of like all the problems at home just made me want to get as far away as possible so it made me very independent. um, and like they would often, you know, they were often at work um so it was just me and my brother and sister and so we learned a lot of skills really early on of how to be self-sufficient and do things for ourselves and um i think they created a little bit of a fearlessness in us in trying new things and like, you know i went across the country to go to college by myself and um, yeah i think it created a lot of good things in that way.  : um i'm kind of an ideas person, like i've done this strengths finders and my top strength was ideation.  : so um i take pride in the fact that i think outside the box and i'm not afraid to try new things um and i also think it's, you know as i've gotten older i've gotten less afraid of failing, like if you try an idea and it fails, it's not like necessarily a bad reflection on me, it's you know, you have to try new things to get better and-i definitely don’t believe that the same way of doing something is the best way, so.  : i think in a restaurant it's often easy because it's kind of like the um, it's usually pretty clear what the biggest issue is at any given time. um-you, like you’re there for a reason to provide good service to a guest and a good product, so what is impeding that mission, you know what's not providing good service? is it a staff member that’s not up to par, either by attitude or skill level? is it the food? is it, you know the, like the foods not getting a process, so like the foods not getting to the table, it's not hot or something, so it's kind of, you target what is the biggest issue to proving good service and making that guest happy and how do i fix it? : yeah totally. one hundred percent. um, and i've gotten a lot of feedback from all my managers throughout the years that um that experience give me a really unique and beneficial eye into running the restaurant overall because a lot of times the you hear about the front of house and back of house not getting along, but i have a unique ability cause i've worked both places, so i can kind of get them communicating on the same level, you know.  : um i think that - like rationality is definitely important um. but - so when you're hiring someone we know that resumes don't correlate to job performance. but so we're basically going off our intuition when we're interviewing someone or whatever to see if they will be a good fit because you don't know until, like you can call the references but their references can't say anything bad about them so in that instance i would say that, if like looking at their resumes, can they write a decent resume, yes, but you're going off your intuition at the end of the day to see if they will be a good fit. so in certain instances, i think intuition is more important but, at the same time some people think they have a good intuition and they don't and –laughs- um, you know seeing people hire really awful people that i can tell them right off the bat that that person wasn't going to be a good fit. and um so it's just kind of depends on you and/ : i feel like i have, you know, really good intuition and its worked out for me so um i definitely have learned to go with my gut feeling on things. : i think it’s a combination. um you have to have a plan, my moms a project manager so –laughs-, i'm very familiar with excel and stuff like that and when you, you have to create a structure for yourself in whatever way it is that works for you, um you don't have to use excel spreadsheet obviously but... you have... in order to get better - and i hope everyone is trying to do that - you have to have some sort of plan um but i also think it's important to um... in certain things, have a flow and not stick so rigidly to that plan because certain things might come up that may be a better opportunity or a better way of doing something and you have to be open to change.   : yeah. umm... i'm trying to think of like an example.  : um. i think it's like often if you’re thinking of one thing that it’ll pop into your head an idea for something else. i think that’s pretty common for anyone because your mind is working in the back of your head while you're focusing on something else and then it pops, you know comes forward like that. i think that - you know you see it in business cases, and we used to study that the most successful businesses would look at other businesses that weren't related to them at all and, but they would still be able to draw good ideas from how they were doing business, and i think it's kind of a similar way on any idea, any big idea you can look at something and something will kinda like just attract you that that can translate to what you're doing.  : yeah. all the time –laughs-. : i need a lot of sleep so i try and get like nine on average. [laughter] : morning. : yeah. if i'm working on a like a spatial project, i'll try and like draw it out, even though i'm a terrible drawer. and um. yeah and writing for me helps a lot. it's my learning style, it like - writing it down helps me work it out better.  : um... i would say not very often. i would say um in the like writing it down phase, i'll draw or write something down as an initial phase and then i'll go right into putting it into action as like my first phase and then - that’s like my redraft basically but it's you know first phase of action.  : yeah and i would say usually would change it after the pilot.  : right, with changes.  : it depends on the project but usually not. i would say usually you have like, i would do the pilot and then tweak things here and there depending on how are, how things went or what might have gone wrong with that run through.  : uh huh.  : it depends on the team to be honest –laughs-. um, i prefer to be the team leader i would say um and i usually am but um - yeah i think i've worked, like i love working as a team but if people on the team are particularly stubborn or not team oriented, sometimes you get put on teams where people don't really want to be part of a team and are open to compromise or looking at other solutions. so that-situation frustrates me. : yeah i think um, delegation is key obviously um but also empowering people to take ownership over those aspects. so giving people equal opportunities to um take leadership in whatever task that they're assigned um,  and like if they need more help developing that, like being there to assist them and help them develop that or maybe getting the rest of the group to help them but really letting them take ownership of that is important. : yeah. um i think its um, you know, it's key. why else are we here? we can't be like steering the ship towards nothing um so it's either trying to get better towards a monetary goal or like you know just in terms of like guest experience goals, things like that you always have to, i always have something in mind.  : throughout the day? : umm... well i kind of, you know i have different, sometimes i have admin stuff to do and sometimes i'm out on the floor in the restaurant um and i just try to balance it because too much time in front of the computer drives me crazy and [laughter] and it's, you become less effective after a while, i especially become less effective, so... i'm more of a sprinter than a marathoner and some people prefer to go to work every day and spread everything out over a course of time and, and you know, kinda like slow and steady but i've noticed with my productivity, i work better in short spurts of time.  : oh yeah. : yeah definitely.  : i think it’s a few different things, you mentioned motivation can be it. um, sometimes feeling drained because lack of support from colleagues or people who are supposed to be helping with certain issues, time of the day definitely plays a part in it, i get really tired later in the afternoon and... i think when it's busy also you feel more energized but when um its slow you just... like all the energy leaks out and less motivation to do anything.  : like if i'm at work eight hours, how much of that is actually working, or how much in a twenty four hour period? : um, yeah. i pretty much work like seven to eight hours. : yeah : um.. i'm salaried so it's like not, i don't have like a fifteen minute break that i have to take but i would say i take like a morning coffee break and then um usually like a half hour lunch or something like that but not ever yday because sometimes i'm just like grabbing something quick while during service um- it really depends and like i mentioned, like breaking. sometimes breaking up different projects, like sometimes it will be a fun project like um i'm buying my valentines favors for valentine's day event and that’s like a fun project, i get to like research what candies i'm gonna buy and what ornaments and stuff like that so that’s like a little mini break i would say and you know that stuff comes up throughout the day.  : umm, i crossfit and i consider that a hobby –laughs- um, i love working out and that’s really fun for me. um and i have a dog so walk my dog every day for like an hour and you know spend lots of time with her. i don't really watch a lot of tv, i don't have cable. um- so.  : um, i think that for me um it's sounds cheesy but walking my dog is kinda like a type of meditation cause i just have nothing in my head, i clear my head and it's just like really enjoying the moment and enjoying like something really simple such as like her chasing after the ball and, and i think giving your mind that break is really important. or like going on a hike and it's just like, i don't take music with me, it's just me and the dog and like you know, nature. i think its' just really important to give your brain those rests because we’re so inundated with lots of information all the time these days, we never get a chance to really break so that makes it better, my work better. when i'm exhausted either emotionally or physically, like my work suffers you know definitely.  : um, i think that, i would say my- you know creativity in terms of ideas or even like when i was a chef i still like to cook or bake, like that’s creative too. um, and definitely the more you practice, the easier it comes to um, get into that mindset, you know, because it takes, you have to be comfortable like in that mindset of trying to create ideas or um, you know cooking or artwork or whatever and sometimes if you're so frozen and you can't get into that mindset um, then it doesn’t work out so, i see the point of um practice in terms of doing that but i also think you know, who knows what that person who only created one thing was doing in their brain, you know, like they might have been having a lot of like visual prototypes in their brain the entire time. i just don't believe it was just like a one-off.  : i don't think, i honestly don't think you're ever done –laughs-. like really, like i guess the question is when is it good enough that you can move onto the next project um, or like if it’s a job related thing for me it might be that i've done this, this like issue was-solved in a way that was good enough for us to move on to the next issue, or something like that. but i think in terms of like if i'm like developing a recipe or something like that, you are gonna test it many times before you're satisfied with it and um. i think you have to, it's kinda trial and error, you have to test it on many people and yourself so.  : um, more productive.  : yeah.  : i think i spend less time but like i mentioned that’s my working style so that doesn't mean it's better but um... : no. : um, i guess, i try, like i'm always, you know, you kind of look at what, how people are doing things conventionally and then like i said i try and look at other um things that might not have anything to do my problem but that the solution might translate over, if that makes sense, i'm not really sure. i kind of try and like one-up myself on thinking outside the box, like what's the craziest thing that could solve this problem and um and then kind of dial it back to what is like more practical. um/ : [long pause] um... so one um, i don't know if this really relates, but one issue that i had at work this week is um, so i have a thousand seat restaurant and we're discussing our valentine's day menu and um our kitchen gets really bogged down with um-a thousand people in the restaurant, as you can imagine, um they don't function that great-so it's an ongoing problem for us so. um, we've been going back and forth with the chef and he is not a great collaborator so it's fine but he wanted to do our valentine's day package with things that are directly off of our menu um and i wanted to do something special and he's like well we can't do that, and so i was trying to come up with a solution for it and um. i kind of said why don't we treat it like it’s a banquet dinner and instead of running the whole menu off of our line, why don't we run it off out of our production kitchen and we can just bring it over and plate it like it’s a plated lunch. um so that was not something we've done before but it kind of solves the issue of it bogging down our regular menu um section, cause we would serve two different menus. um, and then, still be able to give our valentine's day package something special, like a special menu that’s not our regular menu basically um... he didn't think that was the solution but it started the dialogue for how we can start looking at this more like a banquet or special event and less like a, just like plated you know normal lunch service.  : yeah. so more like a catering event  : instead of running everything out of the restaurant : so bring : yeah. so basically offer them a three course or four course menu but have our catering team plate it and do it like that instead of having it run like a restaurant. : um, so,  it had potential –laughs-. like, cause we've done you know it like it, we've done catering events like that but... he's pretty stubborn –laughs-. : um. i think i'm a good listener and um people feel comfortable talking to me so that means i get a lot of like information from a lot of different people and i think that’s really good because it creates opportunities to kind of like draw on a piece of information that have might have worked in one area and then how can we apply it here. um, so i think that’s important. um, and i think i'm just not afraid to throw ideas out there and i just think the more brainstorming you can get, you are more likely to hit on something that's gonna work.  : no. not really, i think i feel like i'm at times both, so.  : i think it's like kind of a double-edged sword for me, um. certain information i'll retain but then um- sometimes i have the memory of a goldfish. -laughs- : um... i think its like how did i get the information is important um... i definitely do better with written information.  : um... and then also like categorizing things i'll like, you know- i do tend to focus for my job, so i feel like i retain a lot more key information there from one just kind of like, even just mentally filing in from one year to the next um ,whereas in my personal life sometimes it's a little more like- i won't remember something that happened last week or something someone said to me maybe because i was thinking of something else -laughs-. i'm kind of a dreamer i would say, so when i'm like off i might not necessarily be like focusing on conversations a hundred percent, so.  : no, but people – no, but a really good friend of mine would, we would have like a common thing where she would say like don't you remember you said this or that and i'm like no at all or like, you know something that we did together, and i, we just have no memory of it, so i don't know why that is -laughs-.  : um. i think that i'm definitely uh, able to kind of set aside certain conventional trends to at least think of, you know, new ideas. i would say that. but i think you know - everyone has certain habits that start to become harder and harder to break, so.  : no.  : no. : no. : people, well i would say that most people don't say i'm impulsive but i actually kind of am and i just don't know it –laughs-. i've like frequently bought plane tickets a week before i'd gone somewhere on vacation or like... you know when i got my dog like i went to the shelter and they were like oh well, you know, do you want think about it overnight and i was like no and like i hadn't told anyone i was going to go get a dog –laughs-. i just saw her online and was like oh she looks cute, i should go get her –laughs-.  : um, that’s an interesting question. um i think its harder to be spontaneous in a work situation um. i think like, sometimes you're able to do either like surprising someone if you know its their birthday and something, little moments of spontaneity but um. i also think it, spontaneity makes a lot of people uncomfortable so um, and like where i work now is a lot of like older people that are very set in certain patterns and so i don't think i'm as spontaneous at work.  : -coughs- : yeah. i would say i used to be, like i guess it's kind of hard because when i first started i was a chef and now i'm like in a different role, but when i look back at how much of myself i really put in day in day out and some areas of that are really awesome, and like i would change my menu every four months and i would go through all the like recipe testing and, you know, all the you know everything that needed to evolve with that um, and that was really cool. um but i also got too involved and then just like burned out and broke down you know, so now i would say i'm less intense at work but it's also provided me with some sanity –laughs- so um i think i'm more organized now. i kind, for bigger projects i used to- i would have you know a plan but i wouldn't break down like every component for the plan of what needed to happen, i just like kind of create a simple list and then just go. um and now i would say it's more prioritized, its more thought out of what needs to happen and what order and what are, all the different components that are gonna be affected by that. um, but i'm also a little lazier i would say now. um,  i've kind of, i feel like i've been burned a little bit that you don't get anything extra for working for like, going above and beyond, so.  : hmm... most important question –laughs-. [long pause] i would say for me one of the most imp-like, important things that i've learned over the years is that um - it kinda goes back to my family - is that i was not the creative child, i was the reader, i was the smart kid, um i was the responsible one and my brother and sister were the creative crazy kids and um so when i was in school like going to college and i thought i wanted to be a lawyer and all this stuff and i hadn't taken a drawing class since like seventh grade and i hadn't really taken anything i would say creative. i was, i like to sing but i wasn't musical, i just really didn’t feel like i was creative at all, i had that, i didn't have that at all. and then so when i started cooking and opening that up at first it was just recipes but it really opened up this side of me that allowed me to be creative and i think that change of recognizing i did have creative parts of me um... has just like really changed who i am and it allowed me to be so much freer and i feel like i'm so much happier now than i would have been if i'd been a lawyer –laughs-. but um... i think because i... like kind of crossed over this wall of i didn’t think i was creative at all and then i realized that i had some creativity in me even if at first it was just cooking and then it started being more and then i realized like i had all these ideas that i never told anyone that might be really cool and some of them might actually work and um i think that that sets me apart from certain people that might have been creative all their lives because they might have formed these habits or patterns of who they think they are, what they're creativity is like and for me, i just feel like it’s a little bit of an open door, and that's why i kind of don't let certain you know, just because it’s a crazy idea it doesn't mean it's not good or it might not lead to something better you know, and that’s kind of how i feel i'm at. : thank you. : oh, hmm the... most proud of... yeah, i think my interviews that i've done with distinguished people. : hmm yeah, like i interviewed an astronaut, nasa astronaut, when he completed his third space walk and the— another thing is that i was at a press briefing at the white house. i was working for the [magazine name], which was a [university 1: where the participant went to college in us] web magazine. : uh huh. and so i was in washington d.c., and i passed the white house. and since i was a journalist, i’ve seen—there were all these people going into the white house, and i asked if i could also go in, and they allowed me to get in. and then i was writing about the last one of—the last press briefings of the former press secretary, [name 1: an important figure the participant interviewed], and before he resigned. it was just a few days, yeah, before he resigned and hmm, that i'm proud of as far as my career is concerned. hmm, but there are other social things that i've done that have nothing to do with my career and that i'm proud of. i've been a caretaker of twins who lost their mother for three years; and i’ve—i've also been a caretaker of hmm, two girls who lost their fathers; so i've helped children with traumatic experiences and that's not necessarily a professional job, but i'm still proud of that, yeah. : well hmm, the thing with the traumatic experiences comes from me growing up with a handicapped brother, severely handicapped brother, and being a caretaker of a disabled, yeah, sibling. and the other thing is just my curiosity and my sense for adventure, and hmm, yeah. : i think it’s my passion and, really, the—the… i think the curiosity and, i don’t know, maybe... i don't know but i think that's it, yeah. : hmm for one thing, i could not finish up my studies at [university 1], because i was a foreign student, and the tuition increased. i came here for relationships. i lost my sponsor, like my—my financial backup, so i had to go back to [country 1: participant’s home country]. and from—out of four years of my education in the united states, only one year was accepted or transferrable. so i lost a lot of time and hmm, i just started from scratch again at the free [university 2: where the participant pursued education in her home country], but i'm glad i finished it. but it was very hard for me and then when i finished it, i was too old to get an internship as a journalist. so that was another hardship that i encountered and i wanted to be, like i wanted to have a stable position as a journalist, and somehow this didn’t, because in the [country 1, adj] bureaucracy you need to do like… this six month or a year internship. and i was too old for that, because at the time there was still an age limitation of 28 and i was 32, by the time i finished up my master's degree. so that was my hardship, and—and then i just did it on my own and published one article after another. that’s' why that interview with the astronaut, and going to the white house was such, for me, was a tremendous success, although it didn’t reward me financially. but for me, it—i don’t know—it was just following and pursuing my dream. : it was later. it was later. i had to return to the united states. i had to return to the united states. : other hardships are my current, hmm, like extensions of visas and hmm, like immigration status, and dealing with that at the same time, yeah. : all these? (-laughs-) : (-laughs-) oh well, i had therapy. uh huh. that helped me. exercising a lot. i do yoga. i read a lot on how to make myself feel better, and yeah... that’s\ : yes. hmm i was an assistant for the [institution 1], which is a—a prestigious institute that fosters the transatlantic ties between america and [country 1]. and so i was a research assistant to—to them, and somehow these people, they were so—i don’t know—so talented, and so creative, at the same time as they were holding a… like i know this cultural historian who is a psychiatrist; like these combinations that you break out of one field and you have several fields, it’s interdisciplinary thinking that made me want to come back to the united states. i really liked it because in [country 1], people just follow one path and there's just one thing, but here, i've worked for—i was an assistant to a civil rights lawyer who also writes novels and playwrights. that combination always fascinated me—that you can do several things, that you can be good at several things, yeah. : well, they encouraged me to come back to the united states, because they saw that—they saw that i was still so attached to the country, and they also saw my limitations in [country 1], yeah. so they were encouraging—encouraging me to take that step to come back here, yeah.   : wait. i was always going to art galleries and museums and hmm, and then i got to know more people in the arts and hmm, and there was like a panel discussion with the curator and editor. and i approached him afterwards, and said “i'd like to contribute to—to this art magazine, what would i have to do?” he said, “send me some samples of your work,” which i did, and so that's how it started. i started publishing articles, and then more museums and hmm, galleries knew about me and invited me to press conferences. and so just one door after another opened, so that i established myself as an—like art reviewer, art critic. so i'm a journalist for the arts, yeah. but i sometimes write also on other—like about other subjects, yeah.   : in my field? : hmm, what advice do i give? maybe to be really focused, more... i took a little bit—maybe i let too much time pass by. hmm, the thing is that, if you get a rejection, it—it depends on your sensitivity. some people can overcome it faster than others. for me it takes long—longer, like i produced three tv shows, and it didn't become successful. i put my whole heart into it, and it was so—so important to me. i interviewed these jewish artists hmm, about their holocaust projects, and this was so important to me being [country 1, adj], and having this dark part of history. i mean, like being from this country that has this dark history—chapter in history. and hmm, so i wanted to do something good that the ancestors of my decedents did wrong or so, and hmm, but then it didn't become successful. so you need to have a thick skin, but it's something that you can’t necessarily develop. so you need to find—yeah, you need to be clear about this, i think. yeah. : clear about if you can handle the rejections maybe, and yeah. if things don't go that smoothly and—and maybe have something outside of it that helps you to overcome it. and for me, like that having a purpose with these children, taking care of them, gave me a purpose also. so i thought like, “okay if this didn't work as well, at least i'm a good person.” (-laughs-) : it's really... yeah, i don’t—i don't know. i don’t know. : i didn't change... : why is it important to get involved in journalism? because hmm information—for providing information to make a change in the world. that is, you can change something in society through journalism. hmm educational—for educational purposes\ : yeah, it's important. and also because i enjoy meeting interesting people and— yeah.   : also from a sense of responsibility. like i—when there was a tsunami disaster in 2004, i helped at [university 1] international—at the international hmm, department for asian studies for—for fiscal international department of... and it was important to get the press releases written, and to get something out to fundraise money for the victims that were, yeah, affected by the tsunami disaster. so yeah, i think there's a sense of responsibility. at least that’s the kind of journalism i like to provide, yeah. uh huh. : in journalism?   : you mean, when i—if i reached a point where i thought i don't want to do this anymore? : yeah, there were points like this, because our writing pays extremely little money. you don't do it for the financial reward. sometimes i make fifty dollars and i'm working three days on an article, until i research the—the—the subject matter, go to the galleries. i mean if—until it's completely finished, it’s probably three days passed by, and i get fifty dollars for it. and—and then you wonder, you know, a hairdresser who cuts your hair in ten minutes makes like—i don’t know—you know, like twenty dollars, and it just seems very unfair. and then, yeah, and then you know, sometimes you see that you don't have certain things, and other people have those things. i'm not a materialistic person, but there—there's a certain standard, and i'm struggling to reach, to keep that standard. it's incredible. i have like this master's degree; i studied here and—and in [country 1], and i'm doing these intellectual things. yet i'm not getting the financial reward for it, and you—you wonder if i have taken the right path. yeah. : how do i resolve? well, like doing other things to support myself, (-laughs-) that sort of relate, just a tiny bit, to journalism. like i teach languages, so that has something to do with writing. i can use articles in my classes. if i teach [country 1, adj], i use an article and we translate it together from [country 1, adj] into english, or yeah, we discuss it. and so i can integrate that, yeah. uh huh. : yes. most definitely. i mean like the [institution 1], i think they are very influential. but also a professor, a former professor of mine, who is an american who moved to [country 1]—i don't know—after the world war? no world—how old was he? i think it was in the 50s or so, and he was sort of my—he was the person from america living in [country 1] and making a life in [country 1]. and then another hmm, person, he's a historian from new york, and he's very… a renowned historian in [country 1]. and hmm he gave [name 2] the idea to wrap the reichstag building. so he's also an american living in [city 1: capital of participant’s home country]. so i have those two people that were very influential to me, because they were doing the exact thing that—thing that i'm trying that—i was trying to do over here.   : exactly.   : no, it was not actively pursuing them. it was that professor; he was my professor for translation, so he sort of, hmm, i don't know—we started talking one day and he found out i lived in the united states. and this was how the friendship developed and hmm, and then the other person, i met him at a hmm… it was a party from the foreign corresponding guy, [name 3: npr journalist]. he was the guy, [name 3]—he was an npr journalist and he was a foreign correspondent in [city 1] in 2000. so i happened to meet [name 4: a historian] who is that historian i just talked about, and so we started talking and it was a mutual interest, yeah. i don’t know.   : yeah, also the struggle. but then with [name 4] was also the... because he gave the idea to [name 2] about the reichstag building. so it was art related, yeah. and he owned a gallery and yeah, the… yeah. and both of them are jewish also, so there's always the subject matter, yeah. that was all the stuff. : but they're very different from each other personality-wise, because the professor has a—had a family there, and is married and has children. so hmm, nurturing is for him much more important than for the other one. the other one is a very independent person living on his own. both are in their 70’s, or like the other one is even in his 80's, now 80. so they're very different. but the one is like, you can create—you can create your own, like [name 4], the historian; and the other person is more the nurturing type. i'm like that too, yeah. he wanted to see people develop. he wanted to see people becoming what they wished to become, yeah. : yeah, i like that. i like seeing them grow. i don't know if i have that much knowledge to give them, but i like that, yeah. i like the interaction. yes, i like that. : my students? : i think that you need to have passion for what you're doing. i think that's a really big motivation because there's so many people, in [country 1] at least, that do things that they don't really want to do, because the pursuit of one's dreams is not as encouraged.   : uh huh. and so there are many people who do things half-heartedly, and they're frustrated and if they see someone doing what they want to do, they can't… they're really envious and they don’t—they can't feel happy for you. and i think everyone should do what they're meant to be. i think that's very important, yeah. : as far as language is concerned, we never talked about this. while actually that’s not true. when i was in [country 2: where the participant used to be a teacher]—when i was a teacher in [country 2], i told them about a book project. i hadn't published a book yet, and i showed them like… my dream, and said it's so important. and this is important to me, especially in [country 2], where it's often more of an oppressive culture where the family has a very strong influence on you, and they want their children to be—and of course every parent wishes this for their children—to have a secure hmm, career. but, for instance, i had this one student, and he wanted to go and study abroad and his mother wanted to send him to the army for ten years. so she signed him up to the army for ten years, and he said his heart broke about this, and it's killing his spirit and—and hmm… and so i wanted to show my students in [country 2] hmm that, yes it's really important to pursue your dreams and—and… just that me being in [country 2] from [country 1], and having lived in the united states, i think i was a role model for—for the ones that were questioning this, if this is good or not. maybe not a role model, who knows. maybe they had pity with me, i don't know. (-laughs-) but at least i was an example of someone doing the things they weren't thinking about and not doing, and not caring about themselves, yeah. (-laughs-) : in my field?   : i don't run into so many people that are like beginners in the field in journalism. : yeah, i can't tell, yeah. i don’t want to be sounding—it just doesn't come across me, yeah. : hmm, yes. ladies are—i think if there's a gender difference, as far as they carry out, or how they perceive? : i think that men generally are always more confident in how they talk and how they present themselves. i feel like women have the tendency to feel a little bit more insecure. it really—it really depends though. i have to say it really depends. but maybe as a tendency, maybe men\ : also, i think if a man—especially if someone reached a certain level—people don't question anymore what he has written or if it’s really true. they just look at the title. it's my feeling; it doesn't mean that my observation is correct, you know. i cannot look into these people's minds, but hmm that's— sometimes my feeling that people, if they reached a certain level, they can say whatever they want to, and other people will follow that thought or accept that thought or idea, because the person has established themselves, yeah. : did that answer your question? : oh yeah, i would always suggest not to just focus on career. it's really important to have hobbies and to have personal relationships, that's very important. and of course, family too. if you have a healthy family that hmm, yeah.   : life skills... in which—can you give me an example? : oh yeah, i think integrity is important. yeah, absolutely. being honest and also being honest to yourself. you know, what you can do, to really have a good sense to where your limitations are. your strengths, you should know about your strengths and weaknesses. for instance, when i did the tv shows, you know, i… this is an—it looked so easy if you look at tv hosts, it looks so easy if they talk in front of the camera—but i'm more of an introverted person. i'm not much of a public speaker person. i get nervous and that you know who—so i've learned. i mean i've known that before, but maybe for me it's better to be behind the—doing something off the camera and then, you know, these sort of things. getting a good sense of what is good for you. to give the best of—give the best of yourself, yeah.   : hmm, well my father is very, very well read. he's interested in everything. he reads one book after another, so he has an intellectual interest, so he's certainly, hmm, that's one influence. and then i come from a family of refugees with interesting backgrounds, i mean, backgrounds as far as historically interesting backgrounds, not so much—like i don't come from an elite family or anything like this. yeah but hmm, my father was born in east [city 1], and he ran away from—not ran away, but he left east [country 1] before the wall was built. then my mother and my grandparents were born in [country 3: participant’s mother’s birth country]. they were [country 1, adj] settlers in [country 3] and they, hmm... hitler wanted to have all [country 1, adj]s back in [country 1] during world war ii, so they—both of my parents come from hmm, from refugee backgrounds, which help me to—which made me develop this interest for historical subject matters. also and… yeah.   : well, i love to play the piano. i like dancing. i did a lot of things in—in nature.  climbing trees, roller skating. i took care of my brother and, hmm yeah. i think that's it, yeah. i like painting, and drawing. yeah.   : oh yeah, i had two. my—my—one brother passed away. this sibling that was disabled, he already passed away. so i have one brother left, yeah. an older brother. : he's creative, but in another way. and he is, he does the lighting for like, performances.   : music, or whatever. yeah.   : no, because he was so severely handicapped. yeah, he was like a one-year… he turned—he lived until he was 32 or 33. and he was—his mental state was like a one-year-old person, yeah.   : uh huh. reading something on the internet, in the news, and then, yeah. or like, i get a lot of press releases, and then i'll read it and... but also things that i pick up in the news, or things that i see when i'm walking through the city, or something like that, yeah. : there must be something interesting either from the subject matter, the background of the—of the artist. and of course aesthetically, needs to be appealing to me.   : well, first of all there's a word limitation on it. (-laughs-) but then, of course, you know, often with your first draft, you're exceeding that word limitation. and then you have to shorten it and cut it, and you have to figure out what's more important, and what do you leave in and what you take out from it. and so it's like… yeah. what do you call it, hmm, yeah. carving? no, not carving, but hmm, yeah. : cutting it, yeah. cutting it, but also, yeah, anyway.   : you mean as far as writing? : yeah. yeah. yeah. there's sometimes gaps in between, you know, then because there's a lot i could write about. but not that the magazines always have space for you, because there's so many other writers, yeah.   : rationality and intuition? hmm, i think that intuitive side is maybe more important than— i think it's, i don't know. it really depends, yeah. (-laughs-) : a methodical, there's not— no, not really a methodical. you mean like a structure that i follow, you mean that?   : well, there's a certain structure which i know that certain magazines rather want it this way than others, as opposed to other magazines, yes. and then sometimes if i do an interview, that's of course different than writing a review or an article about a cultural event. so there are different structures that i follow, if that's what you mean.   : depending on the—the outlet, the publication, and the—depending on what kind of article hmm, or what kind of journalistic piece i'm doing. : yeah, then i will—then i will look—look how others have done it before. i will read about this magazine, so i get a sense of how they structure their articles, yeah.   : yes, because i always run around thinking what could i do next. and then if i go to a place and meet interesting—like maybe interesting persons that i would like to interview, of course then, this comes to my mind, yeah.   : no, i can't say that. no. (-laughs-) : me? i get 6 hours; it’s like my average. sometimes it's seven, but not that often. : yeah, i'm an early morning person. i love that.  : hmm, i don't really write an outline. even i’ve—but i have an idea in my mind. no, i don't write an outline. that’s not true. it's not true, because i'm working on a novel right now, and i have actually put the chapters on my wall. so i have like chapter one, just like a rough idea. i'm sketching down ideas and like the characters, which character's doing what in which chapter. but this is like a fiction—a fiction piece, and it's not finished yet. now i've written another book, which is a non-fiction book. i had a certain idea. i knew that i wanted to do a collection of interviews with twelve female artists to help fight gender inequality, so i knew that it would be twelve, and i was looking for who i'm going to—who would fit into my book. so i didn't need to have a big outline for this, because it was so clear that it was twelve, and then i just needed to find… of course i needed to have an idea about the structure of the interview, a little bit. how would i start the interview, how would i end it, but that—i could transfer to each person. : yeah. : you know, i’m—i'm someone that likes working independently. but i also like interactions, so it's... but for the writing, i need to have complete. i cannot be in a big room with many people and phones ringing. it's very hard for me to concentrate that way. i feel very distracted by noises, and so the writing, i really like to do by myself. but i like the interaction when i have to interview someone. and if i go to a gallery and talk to the curators, so it's… hmm i don't want to be all by myself like—for like my whole life. but for the writing, i need to have my peace and quiet, yeah. : i have a very clear—i know what i want, but i don't know exactly how to get there.  so, i'm a little bit stuck how… i know exactly what i want to do, and i've been thinking about it for a long time, and i've done a lot of work for it already, but i'm getting sometimes stuck in between, because of self-doubt sometimes too. and then other things come in between it, and i have to look for another income, and i have to put it aside and things like that. so there's always things that you—that come unexpectedly, and it takes a while to get into that again. i don’t know if i'm getting off the\ : like i said, i—i mapped it out on my wall. so if you would come to my room, you will see all of these papers on my walls. (-laughs-) : well, i’ve done it also during my studies. like when i wrote my master thesis, which was a 100-page dissertation, and i mapped that out also, yeah.           : well, that depends if an article is due. if an article is due, it could be—it could be easily 14 hours or something like that, you know. and there are other times that i—that i don't do that much. hmm, hard to say actually, yeah. : no, i didn't understand. : oh i see. you mean by the number of things i have done creatively? :  i don’t take... no, i know [name 5] did. like right now i'm putting a whole package together what i've done. right now, i'm in the process of doing that. pre-application. then i—all of a sudden, i think i've done this and that, and i don't even think about it anymore, yeah. but it's not usually what i do, yeah.   : well, because—that's also difficult to say, because i need other sources of income to make it. and so if i had the time to just concentrate on that, i would definitely do more, but i can't, you know. and on a day i teach [country 1, adj], my mind is... i cannot multitask that much, so that on that day, i just focus on [country 1, adj]. and hmm, maybe i can research something, but i'm not doing the writing on that day, yeah. so i have to put it aside, yeah. so these are the obstacles, yeah. : oh, a lot. oh yeah. yesterday i looked at one of my tv shows and i thought “oh, i wish i could go back and ask a different question.” (-laughs-) when i looked at that interview—or asked a question right after he said this answer. and with my articles, i revise them over and over again before i submit them. oh yes, yes, yes. yeah. yeah.  : yes, i wait a little bit. that's why i always finish before my deadline, like a day or two before, so that i have enough time to look at it, also when i'm rested again in the morning. so i take maybe two days before it's supposed to be submitted; i'm finished actually two days before that, and i look at it again and again, yeah. : hmm. : hmm, the first thought is, because of my bicultural background, and having lived in two countries, and different cultures sometimes makes me see things or connections that maybe other people are not able to see. and also, because i have a wide interest—i'm interested in music, and different types of art, and also because i have a background also in psychology, so i—i sometimes see things other people don't see. and like in art, the way i interpret art, because i can see the multi-cultural aspects in it. or maybe a scientific thing. yeah, that others might not see, yeah, if that—does that answer your question? : it really depends on the type of creative work i'm doing. hmm if i work on an article, i can be so focused. i forget about time, completely forget it. that i'm hungry, hmm, that i hadn't eaten or something like that. now, with the novel writing, for some reason, because i have to create something from nothing in a way, i can get easily distracted by the noise. like if i hear the neighbor upstairs walking, (-laughs-) and stomping on the floor, i get distracted; and somehow it's different, yeah. and i don't know what the reason is for that. maybe it's the different type of writing. or is it that i'm more talented for the one thing than the other thing? i have no idea, yeah.   : i just say, i—my memory is not the best. my memory is good with real life things. like i can remember the last conversation i had with someone two years ago, or something like that, you know. i would know that, i could pick up on that. i would say, "oh, didn’t we talk about the last time when i saw you, like two years ago, you said this and that." i'm good with that. but as far as information gathering, no i'm not that great—my memory is not that great. : yeah, more like in a personal, like in an interaction would be more\ : i think i can do both, yeah. (-laughs-) : i've never heard that—that someone said that. oh, that's not true. that’s not true. (-laughs-) my mom has said that. but other people, no. i've never heard that. : no, i've never heard that. : no, i've never heard that.   : hmm, i'm more selective in who and what i want to cover. in the beginning, i was just—because i—i so much wanted to be working with the arts. i would interview everyone, or like—like of course, not everyone, not everyone. but i didn't pay so much attention to how established they are, and things like that; and work, they exhibited work. now i'm more selective about this. i want to write about someone who has established themselves on a certain level, because i have established myself also on a certain level. so i'm a little bit more selective maybe, yeah. and yeah, i don't know if that's a good thing or a bad thing, yeah. : if something has changed? : i certainly became better at it, yeah. most definitely, and hmm\ : yes, the questions—the questions that i compose for the interview. they used to be a little bit more general. now i would be much more specific.   : and hmm, as far as writing, yeah. i would—because i'm familiar with—i've been writing with this one magazine for five years. i know what they want from me, so i would particularly make sure that they get this information, yeah. yeah. i don't know if that answered your question. : hmm, perhaps hmm, my level of sensitivity, that maybe someone needs to have, in order to understand the art? : sensitivity for the subject matter; sensitivity for the aesthetics, hmm\ : emotional reso—response to it, yes. : nuances, exactly, yeah. uh huh. uh huh. : you're welcome, is that it? for today? : oh, that's a good question. hmm, one of—i would say—one of the things is a couple of years ago, i got hired by a company. i—i've worked as a tour guide the past five years or so, and i got hired by a company, where it was a really good experience. but it was not really my style of travel; it was more about camping and roughing and that kind of stuff, and i totally pretended that i was good with that and it was... and we had to—we were like a small group of tours, and i had to be the tour guide, and the driver—and it was really stressful. one of the most stressful summers i've ever had, but in a lot of ways really fun and really good experience. and i just buckled down and did it, and had a good time doing it. you know like, i wouldn't go back and do that style again; i wouldn’t do that, you know, company, but it helped me move on to other jobs. it was good experience, and i was really—i was really proud of myself that i even made it, because it was really stressful and i just... i—yeah... i wasn't going to quit though; i made it through the end. so it was good. : step or no step? no, not really. hmm, i mean, i—i—i just kept enjoying the parts of the job that i did enjoy, you know, that i was good at. like being with the people. actually you know, showing them new places. being entertaining and funny along the way, and the parts that i wasn't good at, i just kind of endured and tried to keep a positive attitude about. you know, and it was good knowing that the end was coming. it was only a few months’ job, you know. if it had been stretching out in front of me for years, it would have been worse, and you know, there would have been a time where i was like “i can't do this anymore,” but kind of knowing it was not permanent would help as well on that. : honestly, i think most of the obstacles come from myself, because i haven't had a really hard life or anything i could point out, like “oh we didn’t have money” or “i didn’t have a supportive family”, you know, “i've never had friends or anything.” those things have been really good. so when i come up with, i guess, obstacles, it's usually myself. it's usually being afraid, and that can like disguise itself, you know. i can procrastinate, or think like “oh i'm not ready for the now” or i kind of let laziness take over, and usually if i kind of dig down deeper, that is i'm afraid of succeeding or not succeeding, whichever might happen. : i don’t. (-laughs-) it just—i just don’t succeed... no. i mean it’s a process. hmm like, i think even recognizing that and kind of pushing yourself. hmm, well, i think two things. i think my 20’s, that’s a big part of it; like my mid-20’s was kind of letting go of—always feeling like i should be different, and i should be something else, and figuring out who i was, and like embracing that and being like, “huh, i'm not an a type personality.” i am more slow-paced, and that's okay. and then, but then also kind of pushing yourself when i realize i'm just being a little lazy or i'm letting fear control me, just getting past it, just doing it anyway even if you don't feel like it. : hmm well, going way back... i'm an actress as well, and the whole reason i came out here to do acting. in college, i didn't know if i wanted to be a teacher or an actress, so i studied both. i got my theater degree—theater education degree, and i thought about teaching, and i don’t—there wasn't one particular moment or anything. is that alright? : i just kind of realized slowly, somewhere along the way, that i really enjoyed teaching, but i didn’t want to do it full time. like i didn’t want to do what teachers do and all the bs they have to put up with. but i wasn't passionate enough about it. and then i really—i really hadn’t thought about—didn’t think about like moving to [city 1] and trying to become an actress. like… that seemed like such a, you know, crazy stereotype, that i was like... and i was looking at other things, like theater trips i could join and stuff like that, and it just kind of slowly came together that this is what i wanted to do. so yeah, i don't know if that answers the question, because it wasn't just like one event, but it’s like my whole senior year of college, my whole last year was kind of this whole realization of what i did and didn't want to do. : yeah. yeah. yeah. but like what i said, there wasn't anything really specific; like i enjoy teaching and i had a good experience, so there isn't anything i can point back to. it's just like hmm, you know, just change the direction. and i didn't want to teach; i just wanted to do this. but i learned that i like teaching adults better, and so that fits a lot into—like i've taught acting classes a little bit, but then also now i've changed direction again, into more tour guide stuff, because it's working with adults, and you get to teach them just about where they're traveling and what they're seeing and stuff like that. so i enjoy that. : hmm that's a good question. i'll go acting, but it fits into both. and it just kind of goes back to that like embracing who you are, and i know that's what everyone says; it seems like such a stereotype, but it really is. like—like i came out here, and i used to feel guilty, or kind of beat myself up if i wasn't like as much as a go-getter as the next person, or as a, you know, as a type, or immerse myself in the world of acting like other people. and that was just not my personality, and i would have—i think i would have been really unhappy if i try to do that. but i made myself a little unhappy, just always kind of wishing i was different, or thinking i  should be different, and feeling guilty about that and again, i just feel like there were a significant time in my mid-20’s, where i learned like that's not who i am, and let's let that go and let's embrace who—who i am, and the things i am good at, you know. and you can always work on the things you are not good at and try to get better and try to push yourself in those areas but then really figure out what you are good at and really embrace that and that in acting, that's going to make you who you are.  that's gonna be the character that you're good at.  it's good to be different from everybody else.  you don’t want to be like everybody else, so... figuring that out and embracing that, i guess. : definitely. you mean just in general, like\ : i think so, but i think it’s a balance, because i think—i think you could spread yourself thin, trying to imitate everybody or learn from everybody, you know. and again, you do need to embrace who you are, and there's also so many people out there wanting to give you advice, and they don't know what they're talking about, in acting especially. you know there's just all these other people that are at the beginning level, you know, like you’re… and they want to tell you exactly what to do and how to do your career, and there's many ways to do it, you know. so yeah. so i think it’s good to learn from different people. i definitely think it would be good to have mentors who already had success in the acting world, but i don't think you should limit yourself to just one, or believing that there's just one way to do it, because that's definitely not true in anything—you know, in the arts, i think. : early or late? i mean, as early as you can, but that's so different for so many people, you know. there's 18-year-olds who know exactly who they are, and who they what—they want to be, but that's pretty rare, you know. i think for most people, it comes later, and then i think you know, most 60-year-olds would look at you and be like, “oh you don't even know yet.” you know, so i just—i think you need to as soon as you can. i think you need to be working on that, you know, figuring out who you are, and what your identity is. : that's so hard to answer too. with acting it’s like... people can say that specialization in acting is really bad, cause you get really pigeon-holed, and you just do the same kind of role over and over. but some people really embrace that, and they make a career out of doing that same role over and over, and they make good money and they enjoy it, you know. and so it kind of depends on you, if you want that—depend on what kind of career you want, i guess. : hmm, i think—i think telling stories are really important. and i think those touch on people's emotions and their hearts in a way that just sometimes hitting with them with facts cannot. it can help people learn, see things in a new way, hmm, embrace different ideas, get in touch with their own emotions—what they think about something, and—and i think that's true about all the arts. you know, painting, dance, any of those, music. those touch us in a different place—in a different way than hmm, just hearing facts and figures or... i don't know other—other ways of communicating things. and different ways speak to different people. but that’s—that’s why i think acting is so important, because we all identify with different stories, like those reach us in a different way.   : uh huh. yeah, i love to be part of that. i also like—i like comedic stuff. i like to make people laugh.   : because i really enjoy it, yeah. because i love it. yeah. it's not this responsibility, like “oh, someone has to do it or it has to be done.”  like i do feel that way about the arts and stuff, but that's because i love to do it.   : uh huh. definitely. : well yes. i mean even now it’s one of the... i've kind of gone on this journey of becoming a tour guide, and i really enjoy that, and so it—it feels good because it's not giving up on acting, it was finding something else i really enjoy, and it's kind of taken the pressure off of acting as a career, and i can still kind of do it when i want to or... if and when i want, you know. so, i still do acting, but i would say it has been a lot less in the past five years than like, maybe the previous ten years or so. : i've not had a lot. i had an acting teacher when i first came out here for about... i think almost six years, and then hmm, and then i didn't see him for a long time or barely, and then i actually worked with him hmm, with like just helping out with the studio and doing secretarial stuff and stuff like that for a couple of years. and i wasn't doing acting classes; it was just kind of a side job, but he was… but like he—he will always hold a special place in my heart, because he was a great mentor and a really good teacher. hmm, yeah. and i think what he does is really good, and he has a genuine—very genuine passion for it and for helping others, so yeah.   : that's a good question. i think he—he tries to help people with the… like the marketing and the practical side of acting. definitely, like help—help them try to make it career, but he doesn't focus on any one aspect, like how to make money, or how to be in commercials, or how to get an agent. he kind of does it all, and he really does mostly focus on how to make you into like a really good actor, and then kind of teach us that stuff too, like teach you about the business, so you're kind of prepared for that. so yeah, just making—helping people really get in touch with their emotions, and be very genuine with them, and be… maybe not themselves on camera, but bring something of themselves to each character and hmm yeah, he's really good at that. : yes, yes. : yes. yeah. i don’t do it in any kind of hmm, right now, in any kind of formal capacity, but i've had a few people ask me either... like if i meet a new actor, whether they ask me for it or not, i start giving them advice about like life in [city 1], and… but not that really obnoxious kind, like i remember when i was doing extra work, i said people at my same level were like, “oh no you should never do this, or you should never do that, or don’t ever take classes this way, and you have to take classes here.”  i mean people get so like, “oh i know the right way to do it,” and they don't know anything, because they're there doing extra work with me. i try not to do that, but i try to be very encouraging, because i know life in [city 1] can be hard, and acting can be hard. so i just try to share like… oh, my experiences in an encouraging way, you know, and realistic way. and then—and then with the tour guide stuff too, i've had people want to get into, or want to get a job, and i love it if i can help people connect with a job or even just to answer their questions, and help them figure out if it was really what they want to do or not. i like that.   : actually no. i don’t think that's one of my strongest. i think there's people like that out there, like my acting coach. hmm, no, in fact just the other night, i was trying—i was thinking about a friend of mine becoming a tour guide, and i was like “i think she'd be good at this part of it, but i don't know if she'd be good at that part of it.” and so i'm always hopeful for people, but i don’t know if i could really, like if i'm at a level where i could just discern like “yes, they're good.”  : hmm… that's interesting. i mean there's always—there’s always dynamics, like i—i think of tour-guiding more. there's like interesting dynamics, because one of the main companies i work for, we do big bus tours with older people so there's just... they always kind of warn us like… i think with females that some of the older males will have trouble with respecting you or listening to what you say, whereas with men, whether—it doesn’t seem to matter what age they are. so they all—they'll kind of respect them more. so you kind of have to work harder to earn respect. maybe be a little tougher. but i don't know how well i was gonna say, how seriously i take it. i do a little bit, but on the forefront of my brain of… like i have to act way different from the men in my field, you know. i still just kind of try to be myself. but yeah, i still think some of those dynamics are there. : i think they have a little easier time of it, no matter if they are a man or woman. if you just like, i mean, if you can say, “you know i have fifteen years behind me being a tour guide,” you know, whether you're a man or a woman, you just have the experience, and people, i think, are going to tend to\ : yeah, because of the experience. although there may still... i'm sure there are stories out there, my female coworkers. i’m thinking about them like—i'm sure there are still stories of getting a lot of flack from like an older male or gentleman or, you know? no matter how much experience they have behind them. so, so yes and no? (-laughs-) : who? oh, men and women? : no, i—i think in both fields. i mean there probably are differences, but there's just so many individual differences too, that i kind of think it crosses the barriers of, or blurs hmm, men and women. i think you just... in acting and being a tour guide, i tend to just see very passionate people who enjoy what they're doing, and they might have different ways of doing it, or you know, or leading, or throwing themselves into it, but it doesn't really stand out like men versus women. : that's really good, cause that's one of the things i struggled with when i was an actress. i just—i tend not to immerse myself. i tend to kind of get—get like ahh, actress… (-laughs-) whereas a lot of people are just… and—and also, just like my time, like i need time doing other stuff. i need friends who are not in the acting business, and so but i know that's me personally. i know a lot of other people, i mean, they just go from their day job to a rehearsal, to filming something at night, to writing on a project with another friend. and they love it, and they thrive in that, and they—they always want to be going. so i think it really depends on the individual. i think it’s important for balance for me, but that's… cause i know i need it for my personality. so i guess i’ll just tell people to really pay attention to that, to what they need, you know. and don't… yeah, it is easy to burn—burn yourself out when you're passionate about something.   : my family is really awesome and really supportive. it's interesting, cause both my parents are medical, but they never push any of us to go into the medical field. hmm, the only thing they push, and this has actually been a little bit later in my adulthood rather than earlier, is just like when they see me unhappy, or me struggling with it, they want for me more like financial stability and maybe a cheaper place to live, and you know things like that. so they have talked to me a lot about what could—"what if you moved somewhere else, or you could live in a state that's a lot cheaper,” you know. so they—they have pushed some of the more practical aspects, and i'm just so like “i don't care. i want to do what i love, and live where i like.  i don’t care if i have money.” so they—they are more like practical than i am. and probably like more financially responsible. (-laughs-) but just like supportive-wise, they never push any of us to go into medicine just cause they—they both do it, because they really love it, and it just so happens that they—they are also, you know, good financial jobs. but all my sisters and brothers, we all ended up going into different fields, and we all had this very creative side. and that was also because of them, because even though they're in medical fields, they both did… they were in plays, like community theater. they both enjoy singing. my dad loves music, and we'd always have like choral music going on in the house. yeah, so they both have pretty strong hmm, creative sides in appreciating the arts, so that definitely brought it out in all of us kids too. : hmm... i don’t know. hmm, i'm very much as an actress, like i'm not—i'm not a writer or a director. there's a lot of people who go from one to the other, and so i'm not the idea's person. i'm the person who, i say, like you give me your project, and i’ll—i'll try to make this character really interesting and good. so, i mean there's a lot of hmm... i've had a lot of education in, you know, how to become a character and—and tear apart a script and hmm, you know, figure out who your character is, and how to work on that. hmm, and so that's what i bring to it. and i really enjoy collaborating. i really enjoy taking someone else's ideas and thinking, you know, “oh what if we did it this way, what if we did it that way, what if we think about this,” you know. yeah, so i enjoy that, but otherwise i really enjoy like not being in charge, and—and just kind of fitting into someone else's story or hmm, kind of figuring out how my character fits in there. : yeah, it's a lot of different things. you read through this scrip a lot of different times, and you—you take clues from the script about your character, hmm, and then you can fill in with your own—like your own personal history. how do i, you know, do i identify with any part of this character or not? if you don't, then you're imagining, you’re doing, you know, like exercises to imagine how that would feel, or imagine what if i was in this decision. and—and research, you can hmm, you know, you hear about actors putting themselves in that kind of situation. like living homeless for a—a month or on the streets, or there's a movie out right now called room, where a woman and her son or daughter or… have been in this room, one room, for like five years. and i heard the actors actually lived in one room for like a month or something, to just get a feeling for how that would feel, and how you would do that with limited resources and stuff like that. so hmm, and then talking to people too. like if it's a woman with kids, and i've never had kids, you know, i would probably talk to my sisters and my mom and everybody i knew that have kids, you know, try to get a feeling for like, how they feel and what it's like, so i could best imagine it and kind of build that for myself. : yeah that’s just… it's more tough with acting. i mean, you're constantly hmm, either trying to submit yourself—nowadays you submit yourself online, and there's a couple of websites where you can do it yourself, and so it’s—it’s like looking for jobs for other people. but i mean it’s even more just on a just day-to-day basis. you're just looking through all these projects that are listed, clicking on them, and submitting yourself for them. and then hmm, for—for tour guide stuff, i mean, it's a little bit more… just like a little bit more of a normal job kind of thing, although i don't just have one nine-to-five. i have several… so there are times, you know, every once or twice a year, or once—once a year or once every couple of years, where i just submit my resume again to all these other companies, trying to build up more work with a bunch of different companies. does that make sense?   : yeah, for the tour-guiding stuff. : you can work for more than one, almost all the time. you're an independent contractor. so like right now i work for three different tour companies in [city 1], where i do like walking tours and food tours, and it’s fine for you to work for as many as you want. and then i work for the big bus company during the summers, and then last year i worked for one company just doing one trip in october. and so like i called them last month and i was like, "hey, do you have any more trips for me this year?" you know. so you know, it’s good you can work with a lot of different companies. : yeah it's not quite as much as acting, where every single day you're looking for work, you know. but yeah, but it’s more like someone who has a nine-to-five, who’s gonna work there for as long as they want, you know. yeah. : oh, that's the other thing i was going to say. right now, i don’t have an agent, so it would just be myself. but then if you have an agent or a manager, then they're doing some of that work for you, but you can still do as much as you want on your own too. there are kind of two different levels: there's stuff that you can access yourself, and then there's this stratosphere of things that they... like you just can't access. like it's only going to be just agents and managers that can access that. like, stephen spielberg is not putting his project out online like something every actor in the world can see, like “oh i want to be in the next star wars, i'm going to submit myself.” the only people that are going to have access for that are really top-notch agents. i mean, on the really high—high profile things, it doesn’t even work like that. they just call brad pitt and ask him if he wants to work on this or not, but you know. so there's like... yeah. so there’s—there's this level of things you can do on your own, and there's this level you can only kind of reach with an agent or manager. so, part of the process is trying to—getting an agent or manager. and then negotiating when to get a better one, or—or your agent let you go or they closed down, so you get to get another one. yeah. : oh. that's a good one. i'd say it’s… i’d say intuition is more important. maybe like 60/40. but i'd say if you don't have rationality, and you don't have stuff hmm, something grounding you or the ability to, you know, kind of process through things in a—in a rational way, that's when you get kind of… mad geniuses, you know, who may be—who may be really good, but often kind of burn out, or you know, are kind of self-destructive or things like that. for me personally, i would say i'm more intuitive and more based on feelings, but i do have a lot of... like—like i'd say like maybe 60/40. like i still try to be logical and wise, and also moral hmm, you know. so negotiating all of the things, and not just being like “i'm just always going to do things on what i feel and what i want.” : i'm sure i have, but i can't really think of anything specific. i just know there have been moments where, yeah, i'm in something totally unrelated and i'm like, "oh this would be good to bring into acting." hmm, like even hmm, people watching. that's really good because you're like “oh it’s interesting to see the different way people move, and i could use that for acting at some time,” you know. hmm… yeah, and there's definitely been times as a tour guide where i'm not working in that capacity, and i'm like “okay i need to remember this, i need to remember this about managing people or listening to people” or hmm, how i present something in front of a group or something like that. is that—is that what the question is? : i actually really try not to. again, that's that b-type personality, not a-type. i just—i like, when i'm not working and i really like having jobs where i'm like, "okay, i'm done. see you."  so hmm… but that's the hard part. it’s a lot of... well less with tour guiding, but a lot with acting. a lot has to be self-motivated, and so you have to carve out that time to actually work on acting or work on your—sometimes your tour guide work. i’m sometimes bad at that; i procrastinate at that. but yeah, i really like… when i'm not at work, i like to have that time separate, and just be able to relax or do other things. : i get seven or more? and not like a nine or ten-hour sleeper, but maybe like seven to eight. that's where i like my zone, and i feel really good, so i aim for that.   : yeah, yeah. i do.   : yeah typically seven hours but if hmm… maybe a little bit more. and i know if i get this much less it's like, oh okay i'll still feel okay; but if i get this much less, i'll feel kind of crappy all day, so i really try—try not to do that. : hmm, i would say like the late morning to early afternoon. it's like a small window, (-laughs-) where i'm like, “no it’s too early in the morning; no, no, it's sleepy time.” i just want to sit in front of the tv. (-laughs-) so there's just this little window like from eleven to three. (-laughs-) that's my—my good time right there.   : yeah. it's not really applicable to either, i would say. i would say with acting, there are a lot of—there are lots of phases you do... not really like rough drafts, but you like i said, you would just—you wouldn’t just go through the script one time and be like “okay, that's who my character is.” you would go through it lots of times, and try lots of different things, and—and have hmm, different things kind of hit you, you know, keep reading through it over and over. but you’re not really necessarily writing so, you know. : when i'm on my own or when i'm actually filming something?  : yeah. hmm i mean i would, yes. i would practice it at home, and then practice it out loud hmm, so that not just, you know, because you can’t practice things in your head and then you just start. you try to do it, and you're like “this is not at all what i thought it would be like” or “i'm stumbling over the words,” or whatever. so yeah, i—i would—would practice it out loud, and i would practice it different ways, and then you try to get... like if you're working on a play and you're doing lots of rehearsals, then at some point you like gotta try different things or you'll do it the same way all the time and kind of get stuck in a rut. but if you're on a film, usually they're just trying to do a few takes, so there’s… it really depends on like the director.  i've heard of directors who would do like 35 takes every time, and actors want to kill him after. (-laughs-) cause—cause it’s just his process, that's how he does. but most directors just want to get like what they feel like is a good shot, maybe get one—one more for safety sake, they say for safety. you know, so like 5 or 6 takes or something like that, and you move onto something else. so...yeah. : hmm. that's where acting is so fun and silly. like you can do anything. like if you're rehearsing something with a group, like you'll just play games or say... you know, do something completely different with your character. let's say you're like a southern belle, you know, it’s like all of a sudden, you know, let's just pretend for right now your character is an aging, british royalty. you know, just something really different or make... or let's pretend you're an old man, and you know. and you can just play around with it. and sometimes these things are useful, like you actually find something that you're like, "oh, i never thought about this line that way, that's really interesting. i'm going to use that." and then sometimes it's just good just to do something different. it kind of breaks you out of your routine. i mean there's so much—i know that's a vague answer—but there's just so much you can do. and if you have like a good director, they'll get you to do that, if they notice everything is like just kind of becoming monotonous or the same, they'll be like “okay, we need to shake it up.” we need to play some games with each other. we'd maybe play trust games with each other, so that you make better connections with your co—you know, you fellow actors. but when you're working on film and tv, it's a little more isolated, and you don't really do those things on set, so you have to kind of do them for yourself. you have to kind of figure out like… yeah, you're just practicing all those things at home and on your own time. and so you kind of have to, i don’t know, recognize that about yourself and just try different things. try to say things a different way. try to move your body a different way. jump up and down while you're saying it. (-laughs-) yell it. say it really quiet. you know, just try off for different things. play around with it.   : you act like a kid a lot of the time.   : it is fun. it is fun. you feel like an idiot sometimes.  : that is just... it's so... varies. like if i'm actually... if i have a project pending that's coming up... acting-wise, i mean maybe just one or two hours a day. but if i have a project pending for tour guide stuff, like i'm about to go on a big trip, then the whole couple of weeks before that, you know, it might be 5 or 6 hours a day. but if i'm just giving my little tours here in la that i already know on the back of my hand, then i'm not really doing that much work, because i already got them memorized. you know, i may be just a few minutes before like, on the train, on the way there, i may be going over my notes a little bit to make sure i have dates down and stuff like that. so it really… sorry, that's... it’s going all over the place. but it really is, just all over the place. it just kind of depends, what's going on in your life. : hmm i like—i like dancing. i like swing dancing. i like doing a lot of different kinds, but i do it very sporadically. i'm actually trying, right now, to do that more often. i'm taking dance classes. hmm that's really fun. i love to read. i read all the time, just fun fiction stuff. i like watching tv and movies. : yeah, hmm i mean especially watching tv and movies, cause you’re just—you're thinking about people's performances and what, you know, what's really good and what's not.  like just last night i was hmm, watching super girl with my roommate, and she's a writer, and so i was like, “i didn’t like that scene,” and i told her why, and she’s like “oh that's really good to know as a writer.” okay, you know, so like... but then i mean, i try not to analyze too much, because i still want to enjoy it, but you do. you know, you watch really good performances and sometimes i even watch stuff... like right now i have some of the award screeners, like things that are nominated for the academy awards, and they're way more depressing than i would normally watch, but i'm like okay. you know, this is award season, and these are all nominated for oscars and screen actors guild awards, so i want to watch them, you know, and see, so—so that's mostly... reading is more of an escape for me, but i really like—but it still influences me because i feel like i know a lot of... even though i read fiction. it's like… that’s a—that’s an important genre, and in acting as well, and in movies and tv, so they connect, definitely. and swing dancing, or any kind of dancing, yeah. i mean i really like it; changes how you move your body, and it’s good just to keep in shape and all those kind of things, so... they all interact somehow. : that’s interesting. cause there... it's funny cause if you look at actors, there are ones who have said like, they're in really good stuff and they're in really bad stuff, and they just said like, "i take every project handed to me. i'm not discriminating; i just want to work."  and… but you mostly think of them as good actors. it's people like michael kane and samuel l. jackson. i mean, they're just like “i'll do whatever comes my way.” so you kind of see that. you see like “oh they're in some really bad stuff sometimes,” but mostly people think of them as really good actors, cause they have years of acting behind them and doing like so many movies.  me personally, i guess—i guess that counts less. i don't just try to do like the most, you know, i could ever do. but i do—but i do think it's important. i think acting, it builds on itself, you know.  every project you're in, you're gonna learn something new, and you're gonna benefit from the projects you've done before, you know. experience is important, and i think you become, usually, a better actor, you know, unless something's just wrong. (-laughs-) you know, the more you're in... i mean, i think that's… yeah, that’s important. : so, not like after you're totally done with the project, but when you're still in the midst of it? : well, that's the first thing i thought you were saying is like, go back and think about your work even though it's already done. and i'm sure, you know, i do that a little bit, but not actually, not a ton because there's just... yeah. but every once in a while, you'll have a moment where you're like “oh, i should have tried that!” (-laughs-) “i should have done that with my character and it's too late.” but when you're in the midst of it, i say that you do—i say most actors do that a lot like i do. like you try not to just do it, unless the director says do it the exact same way—that was great. you know, “i need you to do it the exact same way.” unless they say that, then you always want to try something a little different.   : probably less. : probably less. (-laughs-) : tour guide, probably not. maybe a little less, but not, yeah. i feel like some people, as a tour guide, are really like over achievers and i'm like hmm... (-laughs-) i—i want to do a good job, but i tend to not be, you know, like... i don’t know. i just don’t want to spend my whole life doing this one thing, so i tend to—i tend to make room for other things for balance, and so i tend to do less even as a tour guide. : i don't know. it feels very vague... bringing together different ideas. : yeah. (-coughs-) excuse me. i guess that is...sorry, yes. if that's what you mean, then hmm, i think it's really important in—in acting and in—in tour guide stuff. cause tour guide, i mean, a lot—a lot of your job is gathering information and putting it all together, you know. cause you're teaching people about the places you're going and all of that, is—that does that make sense? is that kind of what you’re looking at? : but it's less creative ideas and more information. but you're figuring out how to put it together in a way that kind of makes sense to people. i do kind of tell the story and make the—the timeline makes sense, because i think that helps people understand it better. with acting it’s definitely more creative, and yeah, you're trying to pull from all sorts of different sources. so yeah, okay, i'm getting it better now. (-laughs-) that—that is very important, yeah.  i think you're gonna look at what other people in the past have done, look at what the playwright maybe meant, you know, look at your own experiences, like i said interviewing other people and seeing what their experiences are like, or trying to create new experiences for yourself, so that you can understand this character better, so\ : hmm, uh huh. no, i feel like people are a lot more, like when i see other actors working and preparing stuff, i feel like other people can be a lot more creative than me. i mean i'm sure i have—i’m sure i have like unique qualities in that way, but i don't, you know, feel like that's a super strong suit... creativity is so vague. you know, i feel like i try to draw on what i've learned, or ideas that i've gotten from other people, or how i've learned to look at a script and stuff like that. but i don't feel like i'm super creative...or like\ : yeah, if like i'm really good at that, you know. yeah. : i would say both. i would i definitely—would not say i'm laser focused, super intense, you know, kind of person. hmm but i'm not—i don’t swing way the other way either.  i'm don’t—i’m not just like so easily distractible that i don’t get anything done, or i'm all over the place. i'm somewhere in the middle. i can—i can kind of be distracted. i laugh at myself when i have like a day at home, like getting stuff done, because i'm like i need to do this—i need to do this, and i get distracted by the next thing, and the next thing… but i've learned to like make lists, and that helps me check them off and focus a little better. so, i think i'm somewhere in the middle. i don't think i'm really bad one way or the other.   : i… so wish i had a better memory. i feel like i—i feel like i lose things pretty quickly.  like may… my—my short-term memory is fine, but i really love like experiences and memories and hmm, and i feel like i don't remember very well, if that makes any sense. like i have my friends who remind me all the time like, “oh yeah we saw that movie together like three months ago,” and i'm like “oh, i've already forgotten.” i—i hate it, so i don't feel like i have a great memory. :  a little bit, but not really bad. every once in a while, i just don't think through something well enough, and so we like make a plan, and it didn't work because i forgot this one part of it, you know, like “oh, we need to tell so and so to actually meet us here” or you know, something, but it's not... it's something every once in a while. i kick myself about… but it's not so bad that people are like, that's a label, you know, of like… “oh yeah, she's really absent minded,” so... a little bit. not too bad. : i guess i… that was too vague. (-laughs-) too vague, or am i not getting the concept? : i might be a little more uninhibited, like friends—friends of mine who are in kind of nine-to-five jobs, i think, would characterize me as that, because they would say like, “you know, you are so flexible.” you don't have to have that much structure, i could never do that.” hmm… so i—i can thrive with like, you know, not much structure, and that kind of amazes people or is different from them, you know. but, but—but again, i don't see myself as really like uninhibited because i—i don’t know, i don't feel like i'm that kind of like creative genius that's just uninhibited by all of these social structures and all... i feel like i'm pretty—i'm more on the normal side, and i do care what like people think about me, or how things have been done before, how they should be done, or like doing things right or wrong... like i'm a little more inhibited in that way. so i—yeah, i feel like all of my answers are yes and no. (-laughs-) but that makes sense? : like maybe i'm a little more on that side... like the uninhibited to the normal average bear, but yeah, but i don’t i feel like i know what you're talking about with this creative genius that's so uninhibited, like the painters, you know, all this kind of stuff, and i don't feel like i'm that at all. : i—i don't think people would describe me as that. i think i can be like flexible and go somewhere last minute or something like that, but not impulsive in the way like i just do whatever i like in the moment. i tend to think things through more or... yeah. : definitely not. : no. : hmm. : yeah. well, i'm sure it has. i'll talk about acting because i think with tour guide, i've only been doing that about 4 years and even that had ... hmm so i feel like it's still…you know. i'm still kind of figuring that out. : yeah, hmm but i started it a little later in life, so i already kind of figured out a lot of who i was at that time, so i think i was a little bit more, like... already confident or already settled when i came into it. whereas acting, i came here when i was 23, so it's been more of a journey. i mean, just with more maturity and more confidence, and like i said, that big time i think, in my twenties with just being more comfortable with who i am and not kind of trying to fit into other people's shoes, or what i thought i should be.  yeah, i don't think my processes of how i do acting have changed that much, except like getting more knowledge or seeing how people do things. i guess that's the creative—you know, putting things together, you know, over time. you know, i'm sure those have been there, but i would say the biggest thing is me changing and maturing, and figuring out who i am over time. : yeah, if there is anything... you know, what's funny is, i noticed this coming up with all the tests we do here is... so, okay let’s see. so i would say, over time, like i have learned to be let go of kind of like right and wrong, and being more creative and just kind of, you know, accept what happens or whatever. but i notice with these tests, and i—i used to be more like this when i was younger, and it comes up is like this, this like wanting things to be right or wrong or black and white, and like that being more manageable, and—and making me feel good. because you know, exactly when you've done right or wrong, but i don’t like the wrong... i don't like the wrong part. yeah i don't know if it's really… i mean it’s important, but it like—but it comes every time i'm here, i think about it because we do these tests where there's like a right and wrong answer, but sometimes they're harder and harder, you know, and i'm like “oh i can't figure out the right answer.” and sometimes i can let go of it and be like, “oh well, you know, i'm not good at this one.” and other times it really bothers me and i'm like, “i want to get this right.” and—and it just comes up more than it has, you know, since i was 18 or since when i was in college i guess, when you do more tests and things like that. and so, it's interesting because it does—it makes me think of creativity. i think that's something that inhibits me sometimes from creativity… it’s feeling like there's a right and wrong, or worrying about what other people are thinking, because i'll even—even, you know, for a moment be like, “oh did they see i got it wrong” or, “oh, they're going to see these results,” you know. and it's not—it’s not horrible, it's not so inhibiting, but it's just something i noticed about myself, the idea of like right and wrong, and creativity is so different from that. there i mean, there should be no right and wrong, but that's not really true, because everybody judges your work and you know, so much of it is decided by culture and things like that, so i don't know. that's a lot of vague trailing thought\  : \but it's something i think about, like i said, when i'm here, because it brings it up—it’s interesting—responses in me to like get things right. and i feel kind of like i'm like 16 again or 18 again or something, a lot younger where i'm like, “i wanted to get the right answer on that test!”  (-laughs-) and ahh, and “what's my score?”  and “did i do it right?”  “oh no, i did it wrong!” and it's really interesting. : and i think that's, with me, that’s something that inhibits my creativity. like i said, i'm not a very, not a totally uninhibited person, and i know that can be really like dangerous and not good either. but you know, but i think i tend towards the more like wanting kind of structure and running right and wrong and stuff like that. and i've shed a little bit over the years, but it's still there. (-laughs-) it’s still there; it's still buried in there... yeah, it's interesting. : okay.  : okay. : wow. that's a tough question. of all the things that i have done, what am i most proud of? i would probably say my ability to be like the number third tennis player in southern california. i think that's like my—the most proud accomplishment that i have ever had. so\ : many factors. i would say like just my family, like my father, my tennis coach that just actually passed during the holidays, unfortunately. and then just like work, like hard work, determination, and just like the drive—just to practice and the work to put forward. so i would say that's like my biggest accomplishment, and those are the factors that got me there. yeah. : he was very… like extremely disciplined and so, sometimes too disciplined, i think. cause you don't live. i didn't have much of a childhood; my life was pretty much tennis all the time. but in some ways, if i didn't have that push, i don't know i would necessarily get to the level that i am at, that i got to, that i would have gone to, so… : oh my goodness. the biggest obstacle? oh wow. that's interesting. i think i would say my biggest obstacle is my competitive side which can be… my—i wanna… okay let me take that back actually. i would probably say like, the largest obstacle that i’ve—that i’ve already been through or dealing with currently? : honestly i think it's like, i have a very… like aggressive side to me that has been instilled because of my past, my upbringing. and the tennis has a lot to do with it, so—so i am working on it; it's a work in progress. so i would probably say my aggressiveness, which is also my talent, too. so it's finding that balance, but i would probably say that, to be honest with you. i know it's very unusual but\  : to find that balance? well, it’s a struggle every day, because sometimes i find myself being aggressive or competitive in moments where i don't need to be. my career is one. i’m a financial advisor, so you know, like there's a reason. i got hired into what i'm doing, you know, cause—because you need to be like competitive. you need to be aggressive, but at the same time that can trickle into my personal life, and just experiences with people, encounters with people, where i don't necessarily like what's coming, like necessarily what's coming out. like it's not as much of a problem when i’m not under the influence, but if i am drinking and it comes out, there's moments when it comes out and i don't like that bit of myself. (-laughs-)    : actually yes, my—oh tennis, like everything is tennis related. my tennis coach who just passed. and long story short, he blew through the cash. and pretty much the time he blew through the cash, and at the time he suffered an accident that left him paralyzed.  : and we thought he was going to die. so anyways long story short, he pulls through it and it was sort of the catalyst for me to like, take a look at my life and see where i was at, and what i was doing. i was working for a small mom and pop it company. and they were overworking me, underpaying me, and i was sick of it. so it was kind of a point of reflection for me, to take a look at myself and see what i’m doing. friends told me i would be good at what i do. so i did a little bit of research. didn't know, really didn't know what i was getting myself into, because it’s sales; you’re selling yourself and anyway, so yeah. i don't know if that like answered your question. so—so pretty much it’s accident. my coach's accident made me shift and move into the direction, and the career that i am at right now. so did that answer your question?        : well. my interests? because… so in my field, there’s like constant—you’re constantly learning. there are so many aspects to my business that you actually have to learn. so the fact that i’m a—i’m always interested in gathering information and learning new things and so… and then there is a competitive level to it also, because most people—most people in my profession don't make it as a sole practitioner. but i like have that competitive side to me, which pushes me. so the fact that there’s a lot you can always learn from. like my profession, there's different specialties that you can learn, with the fact that you can also… that i have a competitive edge to me where i can't lose. (-laughs-) those two factors probably instilled, i guess, that sort of—i don't want to call it necessarily passion—but i guess my focus or pursuing. my… like continuing my career because of those factors.   : my advice would be like, it’s… honestly a lot of it is like tennis—my profession. and the fact that you have to put in a lot of work, you have to put in a lot of time. and in the beginning, you’re going to get a lot of… and i mean, and maybe you might have a lot of failures. you know, like you may not be successful, but eventually if you work hard enough, and like you’re smart about how to gather clients, then you will end up like—you will end up making it, or you won't. some people in my profession have not made it. but i think hard work, a little bit of luck, and then i think it’s good—it's good to have some of education on the financial world. i have my mba so i think it helped—it had helped me in my career.                                                                                                  : yes. because i mean, i really didn't know. even now, like i’m into my profession, it will almost be five years. like every day i go to work, i question, like i still question—am i in the right profession, and the right profession… because i like what i do and the value that i give my clients, but i don't like the sales aspect. i don’t like selling myself. i don’t like selling myself. : i don’t. like i want people to just come to me because they trust me and like me and all of that, but i don't,i really don't—i don't like the sales aspect, because what i’m selling is myself, and like trust and so forth. i’m not selling the markets, as you guys know, you know, not as, you know, like over this course of this week. the markets have taken like a nose dive. and so, it's unsettling to me, to be honest with you, i don't understand it like 100%. other advisors don't. nobody—nobody really knows what's happening. you hear all this fluff of what you—the corporation tells you and the research analysts, and you have to pretty much take all of that information and give it to your clients. but it's—you really—it’s to some extent nobody knows. so i don't like selling something that i am uncertain of. and i can't tell you, “hey you know you’re going to make this amount of money.” well i don't know. if i was to sell you this phone, i can sell you this phone knowing that it has x, y, and z. but when you deal with the markets and when you’re dealing with people's money, like you really don't know what’s exactly going to happen, and that piece of it i don't like. but the client interaction, taking pieces of their life and putting it together, giving them solid advice, is the piece i really like. so anyway (-laughs-). : absolutely specialize.  : absolutely. but the thing is, in order to make it, you—you need to specialize, but it also can be—it can also be a negative thing too. because if it doesn't work, you have to find another, like something else to specialize in. but absolutely, i think it's really important to like, have different like niches that you go after. maybe you’re targeting people, maybe—i don't know—attorneys, or you’re targeting doctors. or you know, you have those focuses.  : because if you go—because the problem is, if it doesn't work out for you, then you need, usually you need to survive. and then so if you don't, if you’re not bringing in assets, then you’re going to lose your job. so, but yeah, i would definitely say focusing on certain areas.  : i mean, the thing is like, there… the—the certain type of value, i mean, you can—you can—you give value to what you can do, and what you can bring to the table, and what you can promise, and the things that you can deliver. but you can’t promise that. i mean, here's the thing. when i meet with someone, i like tell them that, like this is the potentials for what can happen, but this is what i’m going to do for you. i can’t promise this. so i guess to answer your question, i didn't quite understand like your—like the—the intrinsic and extrinsic value, but i would say that there are certain things that are tangible and there are certain things that are not tangible. and i can only provide the things that i know for sure are tangible, and not the ones that aren't, which can also—can… i mean, certain people promise those things, but they are never able to like, deliver them. so clients end up leaving them. but i set the tone, so i don't get a bunch of like phone calls with like “hey why didn't this happen?” you know, “why is it?” : “hey, you told me 10%. why is my—why is my portfolio up only 2%?”  so i don’t try to do that. : so i think it's important to get involved in my field because… so here's the thing about my field. some people need my help truly; some people really don't. that's the bottom. like some people really need your help, and some people don't. so i think the reason it's important is because there is certain life decisions that people make, where they need help, like they don't understand finances—they don’t understand finances at all. like okay, “well i have a retirement plan. how much should i be contributing to that?” you know, like “my company is matching a specific amount.” or “hey i want to take money out of my retirement account, how much should i take out? how much do you think i should be contributing?” so there’s a lot of… and then, “okay, i want to buy a house,” like for example. okay, does even purchasing—"can i even purchase a house? how do i purchase the house? how do i plan on purchasing that house? can i afford that house based on my… like expenses and the expenses that i have?” so i think the real—real value is in what i do, is like the advice and guidance, and the—the planning piece. the markets, i don't add value through like, what's happening in the markets. so it’s like… so pretty much what it is is taking all aspects of an individual’s life and putting—positioning them in the best possible way to what they have. so\ : well, i don't know if it's like a sense of responsibility, as much as like i need to—like i need work. like i need—i need a job where i have income coming in. and in my profession, after a certain point of time, you have like a lot of autonomy. you can come and go, like look i am coming in doing this interview on a friday. you know a lot of jobs, you can’t—you don't have that flexibility and so forth. so, but there is a sense of—for me in—anyways, in what i'm doing, a sense that i actually am helping. like i really am helping people, people that really need it. some people of my clients, they don't need my help. they really don't, but they're my clients, you know. so—so i don't know if it's necessarily socially being—socially like being responsible. i think if that was the sole purpose, i wish i could get to the point where i don't need to work, and i can just go do exactly what i want to. i think i would probably still be doing financial advising to some extent. i'd be dealing solely with people that i want to work with. but i'd be doing other things too. like there'd be other things like maybe, you know, i've done some volunteer work recently, where you know i've been part of soroptimist. and you better the lives of women and girls in—the focus in our region is the san fernando valley. but i'd be helping women and girls that are less fortunate, that don't necessarily have, you know, the resources that you and i both have. then that are in unfortunate circumstances, maybe they're sex trafficking, you know. so… or you know, maybe they just need some confidence, or they need like a—like the boost in—like you know, the way they look at themselves, and like educating them. and so i'd be doing more things, where philanthropic work that would feel really great. but there is a part of my business where i am actually really helping people, so… but if i had the choice, i would probably be doing like the stuff, that like i would probably—i’d probably still be doing some financial advising, but i'd be doing all that other neat stuff.  (-laughs-)                                                                               : well i don't even know if it's so… (-laughs-) : in the last five years? i think fear? cause i think fear, i think, unfortunately, sadly enough, that's not a good thing to be driven by fear. i've grown up being driven by fear, which is dysfunctional; it's not necessarily a good thing. but maybe like fear that—i don't look at myself in a way where i think i'm not going to have a roof over my head, or food to eat. but i think maybe fear that other people like—i don't know—like maybe i'm going to be judged in a negative—like a negative way. i think i've come so far of where i'm at right now that i just don't want to fail. fear of failure. like i just… i want to give it a run as far as i can. and i am in a financial situation where fortunately i'm living at home. my parents are both separated; my dad's in iran; i live in the house with my two brothers. so i mean, we pay for utilities and expenses for repairs of the house, but i am able to keep my expenses down. hence why i am able to do what i'm doing. i don't get paid so much, but ultimately in my profession, it can be very lucrative too, so that also keeps me going too, because like you have like… it's so bad. cause i'm talking about so many negatives, now that i'm talking it out with you. but also like the fact that i can make a lot of money in my profession too keeps me going. and the fact that it's very, very flexible, and that i could be doing a lot of things outside of financial advising. so there's a lot of different reasons as to why i am in it. i think i… if i knew that i am going to be where i am at, and i am not going to make more income, i would quit and do something else, where at least maybe i’d work—i’d work an eight to five job, where i would be getting paid over six digits for sure. hmm, or maybe be doing something where i have the same level of like, flexibility, and i am getting the same level of like, income, cause it's a lot of work what i am doing. so yeah, back to your question—back to your question, cause i talk a lot… hmm, i'm forming my thoughts. : the reason i am in—the reason i do what i do is—the reason i am driven, is because of like, the fear of failure, being able to live a very lucrative lifestyle, and my like, tremendous amount of flexibility. and i really like that, so like later on in life, if i do have a family, i can like maybe work three days out of the week. i like that. that's appealing, so… (-laughs) : yeah. : sure. so i would say that my—definitely, definitely my father and my tennis coach. hmm… i would also say that my brother has been like a huge influence. i always had to sort of look up. like i always looked up to him.  : he's an older brother; he’s older by eight years.  : yeah. so i've always looked up to him, and he's been very, very successful on the… educationally. like i was always looked at as the athlete in the family, and so you know he was valedictorian, went to [university 1: where the participant’s brother had undergrad education], went to [university 2: where the participant’s brother went to grad school] law, never really pursued it, because that was—those were my parents’ like, actual—that was their vision; it wasn’t his vision. he's more of the creative type, and like he's an artist in the sense that he loves like poetry. he teaches, so i've always like, really looked up to him, in terms of just like being extremely knowledgeable. like he knows a lot of—like you can hold a conversation with him about anything. like he knows everything. he reads a lot. so perfect example is my parents would drop him off at the library, and he would read everything, like he read everything, like the librarians knew him. versus when they would drop me off i’d be, (-laughs-) i'd be, you know, i'd be—i'd be a—i'd read a little bit, but then i would see what trouble i can get into. i would leave the library, you know, so hmm, but i would definitely looked up to him. i think he's been a major influence in my life, in like a very positive way. also in some negative ways, because of our upbringing, and like the dynamic between like my parents and him. he's acted like a father figure for me. so rather than necessarily looking at him, i mean, i do see him as a sibling, but it's also—he’s also sort of like a father figure. so now are you solely talking about family or people in general?           : okay. and then i would definitely say, my ex-boyfriend. he's been—he was a major like person in my life, and a major influence in a very positive way. because—so i didn't have that much like confidence in myself, or i didn't really have that much confidence. i did have confidence in certain ways, but he always like pushed me to—to know that i can do certain things, or to go into the field that i am in right now. like he was the one who really like encouraged me, and was a positive support to me. and we actually broke up a couple of years ago. and so but breaking up with him—that was also he impacted me in a wonderful way, because hmm, he pretty much… breaking up with him—i didn't want to necessarily break up with him, but we ended up breaking up and it didn't leave off on bad terms. but he was the catalyst, breaking up with him was a major pivotal moment in my life, where i had to really reflect on my actions, and the dynamic that i was. that's so much personal information. (-laughs-) but it made me look—look at like certain things i was doing, and like the way that i was behaving, and not just with him but other people, and so anyways. so yeah.  : so i would say like my father and my tennis coach. : my tennis coach would probably be like the most impactful man in my life, for the sheer reason—for the sheer reason that i could trust him. i felt comfortable. he was very encouraging. he pushed me, and the push that he gave me in my tennis career, like it honestly opened up so many doors. i ended up getting a scholarship to go back to school, to go to school in syracuse. and like i think if it wasn't for him, i don't know if i… all these different things would have happened in my life and so forth. but i think he’s like—been like the most positive, wonderful influence in my life. but then yeah, those other people. i can keep going on. (-laughs-)   : yeah. his support, his positivity. like his constant hmm… lack of giving up on me.  : his positivity like… just his push. his positivity and his push, you know. those were always, no matter what. you know, win, lose, fail, it doesn't matter. and that really—it shaped me, because it allowed me to gain confidence in other aspects of my life. because it wasn't just—it wasn't about the tennis. like now that i look up—look at things, it wasn't… that tennis is only a small portion of my life. okay yeah, i am going to play for the rest of my life, but it—it helped me build confidence in like other aspects of my life: speaking to people, and like pursuing different things. and i think i came from an upbringing where my father would be like, just say like really mean things, and he was emotionally, hmm, emotionally abusive. emotionally, physically, but more so emotionally abusive, which is, that's—you don't realize how much a damage is done when you’re emotionally like, abused. so he'd say something like “you stupid girl.” like random things like that, so you—you don't realize those things that like actually affect you. because my brother and i had different like… my brother was scholar and i am the athlete, but i never was able to really utilize my full potential of—potentially like being a wonderful scholar, you know, because i was like—i was pushed down so much, you know. like i was verbally—verbally and emotionally like abused by him, and that's not right. when you have been told “hey you’re stupid” or you—or like my dad would be like “oh you fat girl.” those things like affect you. and so you don't realize the extent of those, and anyways. so the reason my ex-boyfriend was very positive was because he’s like “you can do this, you can do this,” and everything like—and then i started actually… and then going through therapy and going through the whole like gamut of it. you know, it really makes you dig deep, and so now when i approach things like i know i have the capabilities of, i’m very smart but—but i just like didn't have… but wasn't able to utilize my full potential growing up. so now i am sort of trying to make up for it, you know. but it's interesting though, because i am a seeker of information, but to a certain extent. my older brother is an extreme seeker of information. so i don't know if it has to do with necessarily intellect and being like that; he is more interested in certain things. my interest is, sometimes i am interested for a specific amount of time and certain things, but so. (-laughs-) so yeah, my ex-boyfriend helped with pushing me to—give me like the confidence and you know, so forth so\  : absolutely. totally. like i feel like whenever i see certain people in certain situations, like i just wanna reflect everything that i've—like that i’ve learned and i constantly go through. all the time. constantly. and that's like really exciting to me, like i love that. like i just like… that's why i am, you know, with certain people, most people in my life, like the really close people are very receptive, because we're close for a certain reason, and they always like—i can tell they like. i have friends like shereen, “i'm so glad that you’re sharing your experiences with me.” they really do like, and i love that. i wish i could do that all day but anyways. (-laughs-)                                                                                                                                                                        : i mean— : just like, be… repeat your question one more time. : i’m—i’m interested in conveying that… i am interested in conveying all the positive things that i am learning in my life, because i feel like they’re mirror of my friends—are mirror of me, and vice versa. so certain people that are going through hard times and like, you know, you can't like change people and so forth. but i feel like somehow i'm going to change—change them, but they're—they’re going to be an even more positive influence in my life. and they have things that they can bring back to me, or i am going to be able to learn from them as well. and so, hmm, so yeah, what's really done that so, is therapy. like… it's wonderful. i feel like i share a lot of different things, but because i care about them so. i don't know. (-laughs-)                                              : yeah, in a lot of ways.  : well unless they come from a family that has a lot of money that they can give that to them to manage the assets, which isn't the situation, but they has to be, you can… first of all, they have to be putting in time and work, like so you’ve seen in the office if they're doing that. they're doing activities to be successful.  : or they're really thinking out of the box about “okay, how am i going to get clients?” … like differently than like others are. and they also have a level of—i think—charisma and confidence, because if you don't have confidence in my profession, the person that you’re speaking to, that prospect your speaking to, is going to definitely see that. so yes, i can a lot of times see based on like—based on like first impressions.  : but then you can get that—you can get that feel but if they don't put the work in\   : \that might not necessarily correlate. if they have that confidence and they put the work in, then that's like the best. that's like the perfect match. (-laughs-) : exactly. if you’re a smooth talker—really, my… you got to be a smooth talker. i don't think i am a smooth talker. i think people like over time like me, and i work hard. i need to refine the way, like my—my—i don't think i am smooth by any means. i need to work on that but hmm, i'll get there at one point. (-laughs-) i'll get there at one point, but cause i don't like to sell myself, so sometimes it's uncomfortable. but if i am in that moment where i am feeling it, may have had a glass of wine or two, then i—i can… i have no problem, you know, speaking to people. i feel like i'm more comfortable. i think i'm still the same person, but i am more comfortable and a little bit bolder but…           : so i think, having the confidence the swag and the hard work (-laughs-).  : absolutely. absolutely. so my industry, there’s very few women in my profession.  : it's unfortunate and i feel like there's not enough women trying to bring up other women, which is really sad to me.   : i feel like there's such a competitiveness to… even not my friends honestly, cause i try to bring everybody up, and like my friends do the same thing, and that's really nice. but you see a lot of people that don't want you to be successful, which is kind of sad. or they don't necessarily want to like, help you and so forth. so it’s very… my industry is very male dominated. and i've had to learn over the course of… for like almost five years now. i've had to like stand up for myself and put myself in uncomfortable situations, and things that weren't necessarily natural to me, or they're uncomfortable. but i had to like—there is an analogy which i'm sure you've probably heard of—but you have your adult and you have your little girl, and like very often your little girl inside of you is the one that like you feel things and so forth. but the person that's like overtaking, like coming out in certain situations… so you know, like a lot of times i've had to, you know, haven’t necessarily spoken up for myself and i regretted it and felt bad about it. “hey why didn't i say anything?” or because i have two sides to me, i could be like super like aggressive, or i can be passive, … which i don’t need to find that like perfect, the sweet spot to that so… so yeah, there aren't that many—there aren’t that many women. it's very male dominated, but you know, you have to—you have to stand up for yourself, because if you don't, no one is going to… and hmm, and also being a female in my industry is a bit challenging too, because a lot of people look at you, you know. people—men think they can get away with certain things.           : when i say certain things, i mean like, you know, if you’re meeting a—if you’re meeting with like a prospect and so forth, and you’re a single women, they could think you’re trying to like date them.  : so you have to make sure… you want to be nice to them, but you—you want to keep the professional bounds. if every time—that’s there have been certain times i put myself in certain situations that i haven't felt, nothing's happened, but i mean like, i’m like why i have saw the signs. but i wanted the sale so bad that, like i still ignored my first intuition, and i should have spoken up for myself and say, “hey, you know what this is purely professional.” like i just want to let you know. you know, so i've had to… it's been work and it's been growth and so forth, but hmm yeah, like as a female it's very challenging in my industry to—to—to make it. but i think people respect you more if you just like… but you have to be honest with yourself and you have to, you have to speak up and—and use your intuition, like your… i will recommend that all the time. if you’re feeling it, there's always a way to say something. always. (-laughs-) : you can say anything you want. there’s all… but you—you have to find the way to say it.  : like in the respect of how to manage a client, or just from the beginning? : – for the portfolio? well i think that there's a very like—there's a very like… i truly try to not take too many… i don't—i don’t—i don’t like to be speculative at all. like really, i don't like that. like i like to… there's rationale in how your situation—when you’re going to need access to your money, we keep emergency money, there's a very like rational way of doing it. like my process is the same if it's you or if it's somebody else. like it's the same across the board. so the process is the same in terms of how i like… we have our first meeting, i go through a million questions. like i gain—gather as much information as i can. i go through statements, like i do an analysis, like before i come back and give you a recommendation, i've like done my work in and out. if i don't know something, i come back and like tell you later. you know, not tell you later, i'll say “hey i don't have an answer.” and then so there is a lot of rationale in the way i like, what i do for my clients. the intuition is—is when i am onboarding somebody, and i’m like might have met them out. that's the intuition is… lays in—lays there, “okay, in how am i going to approach this person?” or “what's smart? how am i going to like…?” cause you have to get into their psyche.                   : like what their hot buttons are. like maybe they, you know, you see them a couple of times, and then like after the fourth time, you ask them “hey would you—why don't we sit down together—why don’t we sit down together for a cup of coffee? i would love to, you know, i would love to explore the option of working with you.” you know you got to… that's the intuition.                           : but the process for every person is the same. what i do for each person, like actually do for you and somebody else, like the process is the same; the investments could be different. how i position you is… could—is totally different. for you, from somebody else, but yeah.                                       : it's totally different on their financial situation and all of that, but the intuition is, you know, is on the sales process or the hunting process, i guess you could call it. (-laughs-) : like what do you do, how do you—you know, so and i think if you really think it out beforehand, i think there is a sense—there is rationalism to… i think there's not as much like intuition. intuition is like how do you approach a situation, or how do you get out of the situation. (-laughs-) : right? (-laughs-) : oh you absolutely, like you definitely need to make sure you balance yourself, because if you’re honestly—if you’re not in a good spot, you’re not good for other people around you. you’re not good for yourself, and you’re not good for other people around you. especially people that are on your personal side. maybe you’re okay, even then you’re not even going to be good for yourself, so eventually that will manifest to the personal people. like you could be good for your clients, the reason like—the big reason that me and my ex-boyfriend, we ended up breaking up, was because i got so immersed into my professional career. and i wanted it so much that it ended up affecting my personal life and the people that were around me, because i cared so much. and maybe i'd snap and become like maybe bitchy, or you know, i didn't really reflect on what’s happening, because i wanted to just—i needed to survive. it was a matter of me surviving. so i think the balance is very important, because at a certain point, you’re going to snap too. like you’re going to break if you don't have the—if you don’t have the right balance between professional and personal. i think right now, where i'm at right now, i've had the… last year i have been very much about personal. (-laughs-) personal in the sense that like “okay i really need to discipline myself and set goals,” and like work harder because at this point right now where i'm at, i'm comfortable but i'm too comfortable. now i need to go after like business because like i don't want to be just sticking with where i'm at. like i have like—i have financial goals, and like even also a sense… you feel a sense of fulfillment when you can like build your practice and grow it, you know, so it's not just financial it's fulfillment also. and so hmm, but so right now i'm imbalanced. (-laughs-) in the beginning of my career, it was all—it was all professional. and then once i broke up with my ex, it became personal for a couple of years, because i needed to like do work on myself. so hmm, so i absolutely think it's important for you to take like, to balance the—the personal and professional side, because like whether it's like, you know, working out, going to therapy, spending time with your family and friends, like the things that matter to—like matter to you, and that are going to be there at the end of the day. those things are like really important, and are going to make you whole, but then it's like you have to try to find that, and then work also, cause you need to like… you wanna—you wanna be successful like for yourself, with the level of fulfillment and financially. so yeah, you definitely… but it's hard because the way—the way my business is set up is that, it's really hard to—to be balanced in any of those respects, in the beginning especially. you’re probably—you have to like cut people, you have to tell people that you know, that you might go away for some time, and like focus on your work but… so it's really, finding that balance, i still haven't figured it out. it's a work in progress. (-laughs-) now i need to move more towards like, focusing on my like—focusing on my business, so… but yeah. or something that’s gonna—something like my relationship was the thing that\ : \that was the thing that failed for me.  : in the last five years. four and a half? five? or no, it was—we were together, well during that period. like let's say three years, not even, you know like the last… so that was what took a hit, that was affected; but obviously professionally i made it. but then i didn't make it on that other—in that other respect, so…                : yeah there's more opportunities. i mean you know, like if i hadn't gone through that… the thing was had i not gone through that experience, i wouldn't be where i'm at. so at the time, i can talk about it now, like comfortably and not in an emotional way. but i really… that experience helped me get to where i'm at right now, on a very personal level that i am very proud of and happy about. but unfortunately, it had to come to at the expense—at the expense of my personal relationship, which you know, life—life—life is wonderful and tragic at the same time. (-laughs-) you can't like, you can't really hmm, you can’t—you can’t predict what's going to happen in life, so you’re just going to go with it.                                                                                             : so yeah. : okay so i get my ideas… let me—let's back into this, so i get my ideas with how to deal with a client, cause each person is different and there are certain things that i just—i mean you’re in the industry for five years. i think even if i was in the industry for thirty years, there is always going to be that one office situation where there is an interesting situation and you know, like this person's circumstances is like, you know, they have an estate. that's a certain amount and you know, they have a very complicated situation. so i rely on… when i don't know i find out like—i go and do research on it. like i—i for sure, like i go and do my… like i—i'll speak to my specialist.  : my colleagues. yeah. : my colleagues on my team, other advisors like yeah, my other—the other advisors. yeah. i'll go on to—i'll google it and like read; i’ll read about it. i’ll go about—most stuff is online, so if you really want to delve into it… so i might speak to centers of influence, like they really—like they know what they're talking about. if i'm giving advice and so forth, it's 100% concrete. so, but then in terms of the onboarding process of finding clients, that's—i mean, what i do often is i sit there and i think about like new interesting ways in terms of getting business. in my business, they all—they tell you “okay, you can cold call, you can cold walk or you send mailers.” and you network, and you do this, and you build relationships with centers of influence like cpa's and estate attorneys. okay, you have all of that, great. but everybody else is doing that too, so you really have to sort of think out of the box, and think about “hey, how am i going to approach this in—sorry—how am i going to—how am i going to approach like my business?” and so you know you, it's constantly… it's taking a lot of time to just sit and reflect and think about how i'm going to go out and prospect, and bring in like new business. so hmm, so it's a lot of like sitting down and reflecting and trying to really think out of the box. so some of that stuff though works, for sure, like you building relationships with centers of influence, and hmm, doing a lot of networking. that really helps. like the face to face. but you have to be doing all of them. like i'm always, i’ve noticed with myself, i am always selling myself. i'm always on.              : which is like, it’s wonderful, but then sometimes i hate it about myself. like should i or should i not? (-laughs-) : but i know also when not to push, cause in the beginning when you’re just like… you’re trying to sell yourself, you can tell people or not—they're not interested, so you have to really think, you have to think about opportunities. and you have to think, “okay how am i—what am i going to do, like for this period of time?” like this year, i am going to be going after certain business owners, and like doing research on them beforehand. we have… there's certain research like hoover, you can go and like research certain companies and find out about them before… maybe i'll send them a mailer. then i'll pick up the phone and call them. like “hey, do—were you able to get my mailer?”  and then go like and then stop by, pretend i was in the area. so there’s a lot of creative things that you have to do, like not creative… i don't know how creative they are, but you have to sort of think about how are you going to be different than the next financial advisor. so, so yeah, a lot of them are stemmed from… i get—a lot of my, i guess, my ideas come from… i either research or i talk to other people. i talk to other hmm… team members, team member is a weird word but like\                 : my colleagues. or i mean i also… and i sit down and think about it. i think about how am i gonna bring in business.  : you know what? i'll sit there, and i'll think about it, but no, like it’s… i don’t. and part of me and sometimes, i'll have a very difficult time. i don't know if you have noticed, like we're talking, and i don't get right to my point. like i have a difficult time. a lot of times like from… i don't know why my mind works like this, but sometimes i'll be talking out my thoughts and finally get to the point. like i don't know how to get to the point. i have a problem with that. and i have a problem with that; i don't know if it's just i don't know its—where it comes from or… but the confidence in the beginning of my life, of not being able to be like smart enough or good enough and so forth. i would be—i would be very like, i wouldn't be able to—not i wouldn't be able to—but i wouldn't necessarily speak up for myself, cause then i'd have that level of confidence. so now sometimes i am speaking too much, and i am like going off on a rampage. and then i get to what my like, what my real thought process is, and what i really feel about a specific situation.       : and i do a lot of thinking\  : \out loud.  : i think so. i really like… and i do that with my friends—i do that with my friends that really are interested, people that are interested in my like, thoughts. so yeah, i think i’m a—i’m a very vocal thinker, i think. (-laughs-) which is interesting.  : no i just mean\  : \like right now i am coming, you know i’ve never—i mean, i've subconsciously thought about it, but like that's interesting. i am a vocal thinker. (-laughs-) : you know. : it's constant. you know, you’re constantly like reflecting on yourself and learning about yourself. sorry, i keep kicking you under the desk, like i am playing footsie.  : you know, actually yeah, i think i do prefer being part of a team. i recently, just recently—it’s very fresh start of the year—i was approached by a financial advisor, who was the—the treasurer of [country 1]. he's another financial advisor in my office. and we have been like entertaining the idea of teaming for a year now. and i’ve been very protective over my business, cause i it took a lot of work, and you don't know how you’re going to like—you don't know how you make it. it’s like you work hard, you get a little lucky, and i mean, you make a lot of sacrifices and so forth, so i’ve survived. most people don't. especially as a female you don't. i don't have—i don’t have… i do have a financial background i mean, to some extent, my undergrad was kinesthesiology, and then i took some—i got my master's in management, and but i got my mba hmm, but so let's see. i'm losing my train of thought.                            : yeah so working—so working on a team. so i've been very protective over my business, and there is really no negative repercussion of teaming. he's been really trying to push it, and i think i just—cause i am just so protective. i worked so hard and you hear about all these like, you know, i just—i have been just very protective over it, so they always say you want to make sure you find the right team member and all of that. worst case scenario i can go about… i can go like, i can separate if it doesn't work out. so i don't know why i'm getting all, you know, i have just been very protective over it. so finally, i hmm, i bit the bullet and we formed a partnership, so you know, now i am not going to have as much autonomy. i’m going to… like now i am responsible. we're going to speak together; now i am going to have another financial advisor who's a junior member, who's sitting at the bank. like a bank of america, so when there's a client and there… you know, you see that interaction. and my field, i work for [name 1: someone the participant worked for], so you don't have people coming into our office—we’re like on the fourteenth floor. so you have to have like an appointment. you don't have walk-ins.           : so i have to go solicit my own business.   : so someone who’s that… so she's part of our team—she’s part of our team, and we have a banker who sits in our office and so forth. so i have been very protective, but i think i—i—i do work better in like a team atmosphere. i have always sort of been wanting that. tennis has been a very individual sport. so i've had to like fight for myself, think for myself, and all of that. i've always wanted to be part of like a team environment. and i think—i think i do better in a team environment. i think, especially when i know, like each person has a specific responsibility, and like you can add more value to like your clients. you can be more focused yourself. you’re not all over the place. like i'm doing everything for all my clients, like you do everything from when i first start setting up the account, like no one would do that. i didn’t have an assistant—had an assistant, but they don't really help you. (-laughs-) because most people fail. so like so the assistants that are there have been there forever. so anyways, i would do all aspects of business like going and finding the client, opening the accounts, like doing the research, like implementing, like actually managing the portfolios, doing the servicing, and then going after and getting business, and then getting other designations and so\                                     : \so i've been like… right now i'm second ticket. in september, i am going to get my cfp. certified financial planner.  : it's like a huge—if you can get it, it’s really oh hmm, wonderful, and that's where we add values as financial advisors. i think, like i think now people have to get it, but so i have passed all eight modules. but i need a—i need to like focus; i need to have like extreme focus, because it's so intensive that i am going to literally have to lock myself away for three or four months, and right now in life i really don't want to. (-laughs-) cause i'm, other than growing my practice, i also personally—i want to kind of have a social life, and i want to start dating again and so like i'm like… (-laughs-) so anyways, so yeah, so i think—i think it will be good, i think having this partnership and being part of a team environment would be good. so i'll have more focus. you know. we'll see. (-laughs-) i'll let you know in six months.                         : right.  : in terms of generating productivity, like\  : you know, i don't think i'm as efficient as i can be. really. because we have, there is so many, first of all it's my own fault. i don't know, i—i think i lack sometimes focus. i'm very distracted by whatever… i’ve—i've been in general… especially, i don’t know. i think over the last couple of years, i've become distracted. i don't know; it's very hard for me to focus. i can focus, i don't think i have adhd or anything. maybe i do, i mean, who knows. but because of social media and personal stuff, and like a lot of personal stuff is like, inhibited me from being as productive as i can be. absolutely, like it's something that i think about. i think about it, but then i am like “why am i reaching for my phone?” (-laughs-) so hmm, in terms of, so back to your question, about how like—how i have been able to be like successful with where i am at, and productive, and can i measure. can i measure? i don't really know. i’m like… to be honest with you, i don't really know.    : i think i work more. well here's the thing. i don't necessarily know if i work more. because i am distracted.    : so like what could—what could really like… i could be very efficient, like if i know a client is coming in, i'll be extremely fast. i will really thought it out. i’d be really like… if there is that sense of pressure.  : goes back to the whole fear thing.  : which is sad that i am like motivated by fear, that i'm not going to get it done, or it's not going to get done. so i think i work, if you’re incorporating, i think i work faster if i am focused, if i’m not focused i think i work a lot longer. because i have those distractions coming in, which is awful. like if i know i am going to the office, and i know like whatever i have—my appointments, and i don't have anything later in the evening, and i might just knowing that i'll be doing other things. i'll go handle personal stuff, i'll do personal stuff along with work, which is problematic, because i know for a fact that i would be happier and more efficient if i just focused on my work for the period of time, and then i did my personal stuff. so it's priorities; it's shifting priorities. but then it's like what's important to me, like there are other things that i am prioritizing, right?                                         : so that what’s… so the personal stuff is obviously being prioritized. but so i think i am faster than most people with the work that i have the capability of doing, if i am focused. so it's interesting that you ask that, because i'm distracted. like i, you know, often… so where do i get that sort of i don't know. like maybe i don't know where i'm going to, i guess, like i know what i need to do, but it's a matter of disciplining myself to do it. and i know i'll be happier. i will. i'll feel better about it. i'll be like “okay, i'm not in the office for—i didn't need to be in office for ten hours, i was in the office for four hours.” i got what i needed to do, i figured it out, i am focused, and like everybody is happier, i am happier, my clients are happier, everybody is happier but no. but i'm busy doing, you know, something good to think about for me, because i know what's the worst case scenario. that i don't get to… like i can—i can do those personal things later. it's not like they’re pressing right then in there. but then, you know, but it's prioritizing i guess. so… : right.  : right.  : do i have—do i have any ways of…? : is there anything specifically about it? i don't… to be honest with you, i think it's just the fact that i don't, something that separates me from. that is different. standing out as opposed to other people. i just sometimes, i think i don't know, maybe it's because—i don't know—maybe it’s because… i don’t think it's mental traits. but i think i like care, and i put more importance in certain things than most people do. so i don't know if it's something unique with me but i—but certain things are more important to me. and i don't think people necessarily weigh in on… based on my experiences or whatever you know, but i—i see certain interest and certain things are very important to me, where i see other people, they just don't care. or i care, like i care more—like i care more. you know, but i don't think there is something in my mind where you know, i think other people are capable of doing that. but it's not important to them. they’re not even interested. they don't even know it's happening. you talk about emotional intelligence. they don’t even know. or you know you talk to them about. when i talk to people about financial stuff, a lot of people like really are not interested, and i can see their eyes becoming… glazed over. (-laughs-)                                                             : glazed over. like they're not—they’re not into it. the reason i think it's for me is the fact that it's important to me, and i care and like i—i act on those things. so it allows me to like sit and reflect. you know sit and reflect, and talk out loud (-laughs-). right? : i'm not absent, i'm not absent-minded, but you and i can talk and all of a sudden, you could say something like… you could say something to me, and i don't know where my mind, what happens with my mind, but all of a sudden like, i have literally a brain freeze, like sometimes i feel like that with myself. i'm not absent minded, like i know things that are important, like if things matter and things are important, i am going to get it done. like even if i don't write it down. like things are very, very on top of those sort of things. but so, i wouldn't call myself, i don't think i'm absent minded, as i am often… i become distracted like, i'll go off on a tangent, and i become distracted with… like you and i are talking right now, for the last… who knows how long. sometimes i'm going off on a tangent, and i don't even remember what the original point of discussion was. like i… that happens to me a lot and i don't know why.   : well recently—recently i’ve been, i think it's very important for people, like i think it's very important to have ideas in certain things, to like contribute to society and be able to talk about… so often like i want to be able to have something to like say. so i try, that’s why i don't know, and a lot of it stems from my childhood, because i was told i wasn't smart enough or i wasn't capable enough. like so i almost want to prove, like literally i’m like—i feel like i am constantly trying to think of like witty things to say. even because i have a point like, i have a point to prove. like i am literally battling with myself. like i am literally battling with myself to like show that i’m good enough or i’m smart enough, or i’m witty enough. like so i guess to your point, to what you’re saying is, i want to have more to like contribute and say, so i just—i don’t know, i’m constantly thinking about more clever ways to say certain things, or like ideas to share with other people, because i don't, i think it's really—i think it's important and i'm also sort of battling with like… i am trying to prove, maybe subconsciously, like i'm trying to prove subconsciously or not subconsciously, maybe i'm just trying to prove that i can, to myself. you know, like i am literally… like i think about, like someone says something to me and in my mind, like this is really weird, like i think i have to be funny. like i'll take something, and i'll just like—like i'll come up with like a funny punchline or something. like my brother i went, we got him a pen at what this place. flak, is it?  : flak. i don’t know. he's very much into like writing and pens, so anyways. so my point, anyway so he says something and he goes, he says something and i go, “oh it's pointless.” i always feel like i have to come up with something clever, like in every situation, think of something witty, because one, i just want to be looked at as the smart girl. and i feel like when i'm smart girl, more people are going to be attracted to me, and it's really very interesting, and i'm going to be accepted. people are going to like me more, which is like why do i have something to also prove. but i'm always thinking, like i'm always thinking about… like i like talking about important issues going on around us constantly, and like being witty and being clever, because there's that sense of like, i guess, like trying to prove that i'm good enough, i guess, which is… anyways, back to your question was…?        : hmm, i would say that i'm… i think i would say i'm uninhibited to be honest with you, because i think i'm uninhibited for the most part.      : i can. i can be. i can be impulsive.  : so the opposite of like impulsive is, you’re doing—you’re reacting quickly to things. compulsive is like…?  : definitely compulsive. definitely compulsive. i didn't know compulsive meant obsessive. absolutely like and it's not a—it's not a good thing. like i have like… i’m aware of certain things, that's like talking back to priorities, and like doing personal things and making sure that certain things… like i am definitely compulsive. so i want certain things done a specific way. i can obsess about certain thoughts, certain people like not in a creepy way, but like—like why am i thinking about this issue so much, and i'm like going just trying to go back and forth. yeah, i'm definitely, i'm extremely obsessive. i need to like, i need to work on it. (-laughs-) impulsive? impulsive… i can be impulsive i would say. i'd say on a scale to one to ten, impulsive\ : i'd say i'm probably at like a two. unless i'm triggered by someone that’s really upsetting me. : but i would be very low on a scale.  : compulsive though, i would say i’m like at a nine.  : just to be clear.  : okay.  : about my creative expression. well that i haven’t that i have not shared with you? : let me think about that. i'm like… let me think about that. something about my creative expression that i haven't shared with you.  : yeah. honestly, i don’t. i'm like trying to think about… i think honestly, one of the biggest things that—why am i saying honestly five times—there is no reason for that. i think my… i think one of like the main, one of the biggest, most wonderful things that i’ve been like able to like discover about myself during our meeting is that, my creativity comes with like talking out loud to other people. (-laughs-) and talking out my thought, and really that's like so significant and so… sort of like life. i don't know if it's life-changing but it's really like, it's huge that i am able to like do that. like that happens so much with me. like it really does. so hmm, so what's interesting about all of this is that, i never thought i was in it, because i haven't been labeled as like, i don't even know if the studies i have done here at ucla have, are—are—those are 100% accurate about me being creative. but i’m always under the assumption that i wasn't a very creative person. really, like i’ve never literally looked at myself as being super creative, because of what, because of my upbringing. i just haven't thought of myself as that, i thought of myself as being—i thought of myself as being smart later on in life. but hmm, so but i—i'm trying to think like, with creative expression like… i'm trying to think about like what your\                         : yeah. : right. i think most people take their thoughts and like, they sit there and they think about—they whether they’re thinking out loud a lot of times. i sit there and i think about, like i think about how am i going to get to the—how am i going to figure out this, like solution to this situation. that it has to—it has to matter, right? so it's driven by like important—back to the whole thing with like importance—like how important is it. but i don't know if i am so different than other people like with taking that, and like sitting there, and like thinking about the way my mind works, with like figuring out ways to—to solve it. i don't know. i don't think there's anything like exceptionally special with me, where i’m—i’m different from other people. i don't really… how do you like—how do you even discover that? or define that, you know. within your mind, like how do you… i don't think i am like… okay well, i take it like this, and i do x, y, and z, and then all of a sudden, the idea comes to me. you know? but i do come up, like here's the thing though. like if it matters to me, i am able to come up with like, i’m able to figure it out in a way that most people—not most people but i've had—like i figure out a way, i process it, and i come up with an idea.                                         : but it has to matter. it has to matter.  : that's like the key. : i'm not that the type of person, that i'm problem-solving and i'm like “oh there's a solution for this.” it has to matter to me. if it matters enough, then i'll come up with like—i'll come up with something probably different than most people will. so how that, the process of that, i don't know. i need to like think about how i like, if i do anything differently than other people. i think it's just, like i go through all sorts of like, i think i just start off with like “okay, what's this scenario?” like i'm going through different scenarios about how to break, like how to figure it out.  : isn't that what most people do? : that's true. yes, really has, it has to matter. it definitely has to matter, and i would think that about most people… but maybe most people don't. i mean that depends on where they are at with their life, and like if even things matter to them. you know like, i don't know, you always want to be the best version of yourself, right? (-laughs-) but yeah, so… : oh my god. i spoke up—i spoke up a storm with you.  : hmm i guess i’m most proud of… i have a—i have a company, and i'm—i’m a performing artist. and i have a company that hmm, i do residency around the country, movement and stuff. and i think i'm most proud of being able to create that and sort of do my own work, and be an independent artist. and make it work for my life, and not give up because of financial stuff, and whatever. things come over, you know, to your life and get in your way and i have resisted all that, and just keep going. and so i think that's probably it.  : well, both my parents are visual artists, and so i was brought up in a creative environment and that’s part of it i think. and i kind of never thought of that as being different. so that is part of my makeup, i would be an artist. but also, i am pretty stubborn, and i don’t like to lose. and i don't like to give up on something that i want to do just because of outside forces, so i think that stubbornness is also a big part of that. : i think financial obstacles were the hardest and you know that’s ongoing. and i think it's very easy. i have no doubt why people give up, because it's difficult to keep going in spite of not knowing when your next bill is going to be paid from and all that. it’s very stressful, and, but i think it’s a learned skill to be able to deal with that stress and that… and it’s huge. that huge stress. : there had been a lot of different events, that you know, kind of cumulatively, one leads to the next. i think i found that, one… so everything is about connections. so one thing leads to the next, and as long as you have that continuity going, you’re able to progress. i think that’s also why people give up; they—they get stuck. i don't think it'd be one of them, but i think it is the ongoing-ness of the events that keeps me going forward. yeah. : well i have gotten to a point in my career, where i really don't want to do things that i'm not interested in. so, and—it’s not that i’m not able to do that, but i... i won't put up with doing something that i'm not really into anymore. so hmm, i think that, you know, one to the next, it’s a natural progression, because the one—you know, one thing i’m interested in leads to another thing that i’m gonna say yes to. and then another thing that i’m gonna—and sometimes there are things i say no to. but i guess it just happens naturally, it’s like… because you're involved with people. when you are in events you’re interested in, that leads to more things like that.  : i would say... be patient, and don't feel like you have to accomplish everything in a couple of years, and or even know what you want to do in those few years, you know. i think a lot—i also teach, and a lot of people who are in college and who are in their early 20s are… they feel like “oh i have to get started and i have to do all the stuff right now, because it's there's a short window of time, or i can’t do these things,” and that's absolutely not true. i would say you know it's a marathon… and pace yourself, and yes still do exciting, wonderful things when you can do them, but you're not going to fall off the face of the earth, when you turn 40 or 50 or whatever you know. and it’s… and that i certainly have learned that from my parents, cause they’re in their 80s and are still working artists. and so it’s—it’s a lifelong profession if you want it to be. and just keep going, just be patient and be kind to yourself, and keep going. : yeah. : i mean i think i felt like that as a student and person coming out of school, cause that's kind of how we are taught—you know, that's what… we're taught to think “well, now is the time,” and we have to, you know, especially it’s performing artist and dance. i was studying and training as a dancer. you’re kind of taught that this career isn't going to last for whole life, which is absolutely not true, increasingly not true. i know tons of wonderful performers in their 40s and 50s and 60s and even older, and you know, i just think when you’re young you can’t see… i mean, even as like i was always pretty intellectual, but i couldn't ahead for 30 years, and i couldn't know what i would feel like now. and i feel even more passionate about what i'm doing now. actually, more than i did then because i really didn't know what i was doing back then. now i'm much more focused about what i want to be doing in, and what i might… goal, what i might plan to do and all that. yeah. : i would say don’t specialize too early. i think people—i think people nowadays specialize too early. i think that, you know, exploring stuff and doing a lot of different things when you can, and if you have opportunities to is great. i… you know, you are going to specialize as you go on because you're going to get more focused about what you’re going to do and what your interests are. and that’s just going to happen naturally. so do a lot of things, when you're, you know, starting out and just see what sticks, you know. like don't get too caught up in the… you know. like everybody has to pick majors now, like their first year or in high school or whatever, you know. and it's just—it’s alone nuts, because how would you know—how would you know what you are interested in, if you don't do a million things and—and try it, you know? yeah. : i don't see any difference between personal values and… i think values are values. and because my life and my work are so tied together, i don't really see any difference in that. you know, values are something that you believe in at a core level, and that should be the same for all aspects of your life. yeah, i don't think—i mean i have never been really... i'm not a—i’m not a joiner, really. i've been—i’ve always been very independent, and just thought what i thought. and that maybe has been, you know, maybe not been to my—maybe it has been to my detriment at some point. i mean i don't really feel that way, but i don’t—i don't have any qualms about believing what i believe, and other people can, you know, take it or leave it, whatever. but i think that's all tied to who you are as a person. it’s not—there’s no difference between your work life, and your personal life, and your—you know, relationship life, and whatever. you know, they’re all the same thing.  : sure. yeah, absolutely. : well, some have been teachers, hmm, and some have been in school, you know, or teachers in other… you know, after that i worked with or took a class with, some have been colleagues that—that i worked on projects with. hmm, a lot have just been friends who have been supportive of me and when i needed it, you know, and they’re—those are really, i think, few in your life, you know, people who will really stand by you, no matter how crazy they think your decisions are and all that. but, yeah, there have been a lot of those. : well i mean, teachers, you just—that’s just sort of… look at what you get. but friends, i think you gravitate towards what you need. and when you—you know, when you—you're in a group of people, like say, a class situation, and you gravitate towards the people who you feel… not only that you have something in common with, but that they have something that you would like to gain from. and i don't think it's a conscious—on a conscious level, but i think that just happens, and that's definitely happened with me. and when it really works, it’s when that you have something that they gravitate to too, you know. so there’s that—that dual positive link between the two of you. and—and it just works; it doesn’t happen very often. you know, i can—probably a handful of people i can say that about. i think it’s a just natural weeding out. : hmm... they allowed me to… to explore who i was, instead of putting on a prescribed notion of what—what i should be. so i think a lot of… and this is tied right into how i have developed as a teacher. i really believe in allowing people to develop themselves, as opposed to telling them what they—how they should be, what they should do and how they should learn. it’s not… teaching is not a is not an ego trip, and a lot of times it is not an ego trip. so i think a lot of teachers are in it for whatever reason, just to themselves… spew information, that’s not teaching. teaching is supporting someone in their own process, in their—in their journey. so you are kind of giving yourself up to assist someone on their pathway. you know, pushing them when they needed, and also, i mean the teachers that i’ve been really influenced by have done this. and i say this as a teacher too, that i—as the teacher learns just as much, if not more than a student, in the communication that happens. it is communication, so when there’s communication, that’s when learning can happen. and when it's just information that’s being spewed, that's not really... there's no communication there. you know, so i think communication is a huge... having a conversation, whatever that means, whether in a lesson or in class. that's when you can really… you feel like the person is really trying to help to progress yourself, instead of you know, helping them on whatever… the agenda they're on, you know.  : yes, absolutely. : i don't think so. i don't really think so. i think you can assess whether they have a passion for it, and whether they have a… i mean success is such a weird concept, i don’t even know what it means. : i would say success is continuing to do what you have a passion for, in.. against all obstacles. it doesn't have anything to do with financial gains and all that stuff, so i mean, i suppose... i suppose you can get a sense of whether they're going to be perseverant, but there are so many things that come into play in a life, and i don’t know if you can be a mind-reader like that, you know. but you can get a sense of if someone is really serious about what they’re doing, but the thing is, they may be—they're serious about it this year, and find a new thing next year and they’ll do that. and that’s success too, so you know, who knows. : somehow, i think strangely, because you think of… and i'm an actress, too, but i'm kind of talking about the dance world, because that's where i was trained. you would think—because you think of the dance world as being a lot… a female world, which it is. i mean predominantly…there are less male dancers than there are women. but i think it's actually skewed the other way. there are a lot of male dancers too, especially like male choreographers and male directors do get jobs more readily for whatever reason, whether that's just the same thing that’s going on in our society, or because they're the minority? who knows? but i think that i do—we do see that. and then other people… it's a thing that people comment on. on the other hand, i have never been one to really take that… it doesn’t stop me. i’m just like do what i want to do, and i’m doing it too, and you make your own… i don't really believe in looking for opportunities, to blame situations on why i’m not successful. you know like that's just not helpful. i just take personal responsibilities for my own life, and if i'm creating opportunities then that's me, you know. it doesn’t have anything to do with the guy down the street that got something that i wanted. well i should create something else, so i don’t know. i don’t pay much attention to it actually. : hmm i guess i will say that everybody is different, so that balance is going to be different for everybody. but i would just say don't ignore—don’t feel like you have to ignore your private life, just because your career is taking a lot of time. and the opposite is really true, that if you have a flourishing personal life, it is going to add onto your professional, creative life. but that may not happen. i mean you might go through times when you are just working, and i wouldn't get stressed out about it, just do what you're doing. opportunities both personally and professionally come when you're open to them, not when you're stressing out about them. so you know it's just not something you can really… i don’t think you can really control that. : yeah. hugely, cause\ : yes, they’re both being artists. they’re—for the most part, they understand the life. and even though… you know, visual artists are a little different, because they don't have to rely on other people as much as performing artists. so they can do their work, wherever they are. and but, they… so they get it, and they’ve been really emotionally supportive and all that. we’re very close. yeah, and just—just the way, instead of being artists, they’re just the people that they are. they set out because they didn't have family necessarily like this. they set out to create a family that was loving, and supportive, and… nurturing, and you know, all those things that—that maybe they thought was less than… in their growing up. so that was huge, and i, you know, i just benefited from that. they were really, really thoughtful about how they've created a family for us. : yeah. i have a sister. : yes, she started out as an actress, but she has worked for theater companies in administrative positions for about twenty years, so she’s in the theater world as well.  : well yeah. i—i had always wanted to… i was always a mover—i was always… i had always been interested in dance, and i didn't when i was little for some reason. i didn't get into dance classes until i was a teenager—well about 12—which is kind of late in terms of ballet, when most people started. so it was kind of… it was odd because i had an interest in dance but no formal training until a certain period. and then i was playing catch up, and but—but it was just like something that i gravitated towards, and they could tell, and then got me into a class. and then i just wanted to take more, and more and more and more, you know. grew through high school; then i went to college and studied dance; then i went to grad school and studied dance. and i had a career. so it’s like always there.  : yeah well... i think if you're interested in it… everybody… i think that it is a fundamental way of being for humans. we're movers—the first thing we have is our body, and it is just a way of communication that is really fundamental to us, aside from being an art form or anything. you know, a lot of people do—are active nowadays and do physical… but it's just another way of being physical. but it also combines creative thought at the same time you’re doing something, you know, physical. it's a really powerful artform i think.  : increasingly now i do site-specific work. so a lot of times, the ideas come from space, so i will be commissioned or pick a space, and then i will do research on the actual, you know, the construction of the space, the history of the space, the people that inhabit the space. and that's where my ideas for performance come from. i don't really tend—i’ve never tended to do work like about a certain emotion, or some personal thing that i want… i’m not that into that kind of personal work. i think that comes through… anyway, so i think... if you’re work on a certain theme, you're going… you’re yourself, so you’re going to imbue it with a lot of that anyway. but i like to pick things that are not about me, you know, it’s about something else. it’s about a space, or a piece of history, or you know, something like that. yeah. : well that’s hard. it's hard to know when it’s complete. sometimes it's just the time—time budget that you have. sometimes it's—you know i think as an artist, when—the more you work, the more you know, “oh this is how things are going to wrap around.” but you won't know that when you started out. i feel like i'll maybe have three weeks to do something, and the first couple of days i'd just going to start throwing ideas around and figure out. i tend to be—i work in improvisation a lot too so—so hmm, i tend to be more and more comfortable, or not totally comfortable, but much more than when i started, with letting it happen, letting the journey happen. and then you come to the realization that, “oh yeah, this is the end.” you won’t know that when you start out and that's fine, and i'm fine with that. a lot of people aren't fine with that; they will need to have a whole plan when they start. and that's another way of working; it’s fine. but i tend to let things grow, and things occur to you as you go along, and you know where it's going, and how it's going to conclude.  : hmm well... a lot of it is who will hire me, so it's all… you know, like i have a handful of projects in the works usually, and which one is coming up next, that's usually very practical. but sometimes i also have in mind something i want to do but it's out of commission, so i just try to fit that in where i can and figure out how i can do that with—within everything else that is going on. it's usually time-based.  : hmm i think they’re both important, you know. i am pretty rational—i’m pretty rational, and but i’m also very—i think i’m… yeah. intuition is a weird word, but i am open to improvisation. i am open to letting things happen, and letting something feel right, which i suppose is intuition. but i am also pretty logical and pretty rational, so for me… and i think everybody's different. but for me that's pretty balanced in my work, because i've dealt with improvisation, but i am very intellectual also. kind of balanced out. : yeah. : i think the more you're working, the more they occur. so sometimes when there's, you know, when i'm not—if i'm not actively working on a project, if there's a lot of administrative stuff going on or i am waiting for the next project, you know, you won’t—that won't happen because you're not creatively working. i think the more you're creatively working, the more that happens; more of those synapses occur.  : well if i'm working on a project—if i'm currently working on a project, i will. but not if i'm not, no. (-laughs-) i mean you know, because… and also the thing is, it’s kind of all—i don't really think of it as.... it’s just another part of my life. so it’s not like business is separated from, you know, sleeping and eating. and you know, it's just like—that’s another… it’s like to me, thinking about a project is the same thing as “oh i have to think about…”  you have to… doing this project and going to the grocery store, it's all—that’s all the same. it's not—there's no difference between those things, so—but i think i'm not thinking about it all the time. no.  : usually about eight hours. : hmm. probably i would say sort of midmorning. not too early, but not past a certain point either, like not into the nighttime. not really. i mean i’ve done a lot of that over my life, but i just not… and performance usually happens then, but i'm not really interested in being creative at that point in the day. i think midmorning to midday is sort of my… time. : yeah i do. : all the time. like yeah, i mean, cause i make notes and i will plan things out—i’ll plan out things that i want to work on. not that they're going to stick, but you know, you plan out things that you want to work on. when something starts working in a rehearsal, then i will then write it down, you know, that’s what we are doing. but that changes all the time until you get to the final thing, and you could even, you know, if you do it again and it might be revised again. so yeah, all the time. : hmm... i work alone on the ideas, on what we can try to do, and then sometimes i do a lot of solo performances, so sometimes it is just me but… but when i am working with a group, i'll bring those ideas into the group, and then we’ll work with that, but then i’ll go back and figure out, “okay this is working, this is not working,” so i’m the director, i’m not… i work collaboratively—more collaboratively with groups that aren’t mine, but personally i like—i like to work collaboratively in that i'm giving my performers an opportunity to have a voice and you know, figure things out and show me things and stuff. but i’m really the one who's deciding all those things.  : hmm well, hopefully you’ve picked people who it's easy with, but that doesn't always happen. and sometimes i'm working with groups who i don't know, so a lot of times i get work that is like... i'm doing a workshop for community that has hired me, that i don't really know that community, you know, and i don't really know the space. so that's up to me as a—as an improvisational, you know, director, performer to figure out in the moment, “okay how do i work with these people, and do i—how we are going to approach the space, and what's that going to be.” so it's really just a question of being in the moment as they say, and having experienced enough to know. and i do this when i'm teaching too, so like a lot of times i'll do a lesson plan for class, but then it'll go in a different direction, cause that's what we're doing today and that's fine. hmm just to know “okay this direction that i planned, that's not where we need to be going, cause these people are now showing me this is where they need to go.” so i need to listen to that, and we’re going to go this way. so it’s just being open enough to really listen to who you're in a room with, or in a space with, and hmm, facilitating an experience that works for everybody. and that's where, i think you have to as a teacher, or even as a director somewhat, you have to let your ego go. cause it's not about you, ultimately it’s about, even in a performance situation, not just in teaching. but even when you're creating a piece in a performance, not all about you; it's about the performers, and the audience, and the space and, you know. so you—you have to realize that it's bigger than just this is what i wanted do, do this step and then this step, and then this step, and then this step. that’s not what we’re going to do, and that's not how i work. i think people—i think it... the hard part is that—the reason it happens... the reason people get so stuck on like "this is what we are going to do, it doesn't matter what happens" is fear. i think that fear is sort of the only reason things go wrong, pretty much in every—in any aspect of life. and if you're afraid of opening yourself up and saying "i don't have all the answers, let's figure this out.” that's what i am as a teacher, and as a human, i'm always, you know, like “let’s just figure this out.” i have some information, but i'm sure you do too, and so this is where i want—i think we want to get to, but maybe we're going to get somewhere else, but let's find out. if you're not comfortable with that then there's not going be a lot of flexibility in you. there's not going to be a lot of creativity, there's not gonna be—there… the doors aren't open, you know, it's just this is what we're doing, that's gonna be it. i don't know, i just think it's being flexible and aware, and letting your ego go. : hmm i... a lot of times i guess i will—i’ll use symbols to like, define a space, to draw a space and sort of move things around in that space. yeah, i think about it without drawing it out. a lot of times i do—a lot of like i like to hike outdoors a lot, which is a big part of me being happy, so a lot of times it will just occur to me when i'm just walking or being physical in some other way. hmm you know, just an image or a way of doing something that i hadn't thought of. so i think physicality in my body—because i am so tied to that, so any kind of physicality kind of makes my mind work. and i don't tend to write like words that much, or sentences, maybe words, but not like long hand-writing, so it’s more symbols and then thoughts so... also kind of not—i have found that if you're having a problem, like there’s a problem you’re trying to work out, it will come, but not too focused on it—not to even think about it. but something will occur within the day or the process of doing other things, and you'll find the solution. so just to not really stress about finding the solution, but just allow other things to happen, and then something will occur to you. : yeah. : yeah. : yeah, i think so. but i think that you can't wait for that... i think that that definitely happens, but i think that you should just work anyway. and that doesn't always happen either, but i think the healthiest is to just do something, whether that's just being physical during the day, or working on a project, or thinking about something. doing something creative in your creative life every day is going to help that ebb and flow, and sometimes there is going to be kind of a slow period and that’s fine. i don't think you should wait for inspiration; there is no such thing as inspiration. you just keep working. and that's something i learned from my parents, like there's no such thing... there's—there's just work, there's not this magical thing called "inspiration." it doesn’t happen. it's not like that. it’s just working every day, and getting more adept at what you do, continuing your brain; and it just keeps going, you know. : hmm...well probably working on project that you're really interested in or— hmm sometimes it's like being either—on either—either end, like either really frustrated or really happy about something, can cause a lot of ideas i think, like being on the ends of that spectrum. personally feeling away... and i think also just working... i think the more you work, the more adept your brain gets at hmm, solving problems and—and having creative thoughts. i think it's a muscle, you know. it's—it's not—it's not random, it's something you learn just like you learn anything you know. it’s—creativity is—is not, it’s not magic, you know. it's just learning to listen to yourself, to—to be open to things, and to act on those things, and being really comfortable with that. : it depends what i'm working on. when i'm actually working on a project, it'll be a lot more, obviously. but so because i'm an independent contractor sort of, there are long periods i'm just doing administrative stuff, like getting projects and, you know, working out budget, so that'll be maybe a few hours a day. or it could be all day depends... and really, it's very variable. but when i am working, or rehearsing, or teaching, or creating project, it could be, you know, eight hours a day, six to ten hours, whatever. it's really up-and-down; it's very—it changes all the time.  : hmm, do you mean like—like a short break? : well, well do you mean like a break like a day off? or do you mean like a 30-minute break? : either one. : i mean i probably am going in and out of work, cause i’m doing all different things at the same time, so it's kind of like—that's kind of breaks but i… and i definitely—i don’t feel like they are breaks. i just feel like i do something... and then i'll do something else, and you know, chores, and do something else, i’ll go outside, and then i’ll go back to work. but it didn’t really feel to me like breaks. it's just my life, and it’s broken up into... oh yeah, i'm definitely not a workaholic. i mean i'm not working all the time. it just may seem like that other people… because i'm—because it’s all of a piece. but it's not like i'm sitting it down for eight hours working on a project; i'm doing a lot of things in eight hours, you know, so to me that doesn't feel like i'm working on that whole time. : well i love hiking, and be outdoors. i hmm, love to travel. i do a lot of like... i like kind of exploring historical sites and stuff like that, so i’m probably trying to figure out new places to go, and interesting places to visit. and this is part of my work too, but i like architectural sites and stuff like that. so yeah, i mean, i’d say the main thing is just to physical physically being outside, and hmm, and getting—getting out and walking. hiking.  : yeah, right, cause my company is hmm, i mean, i do. i will do more theatrical stuff as well, but the company that i have now, it deals with—deals with pairing communities with environments through movement, so those environments could be historical sites or architectural sites, or schools, or you know, anything, building, or offices, or outdoor environmental sites. so any kind of sites, but a lot of times it's architectural. and then a community which may be on that site or not. sometimes i work at museums, and so the museum will offer their community this experience, and so you don't know who's coming. you know, it's tied to the museum, but they don't necessarily inhabit the museum all the time, you know. so we’re pairing community with environment, and we are learning about the community and the environment through movement, and then yes, that's all tied in. : yeah for quite a while. it kind of gradually evolved from me being a performer, of course for other people, and then starting to do my own work but theatrically on a stage, and then working with the number of choreographers that did say specific work. but it would just not necessarily… they do say specific work, as performance, so they were using performers, then creating something for a specific site. so i worked with people, people that were doing that. and then i kind of took it to the next level... of what i do. it sometimes… it is performance, but it's really not based on working with performers; it is based on working with anyone—it's communities of any kind, and—and through movement, so that's my medium. but allowing these nonperforming people of some kind—this community of some kind, whether it's a school group, or you know, a group of office workers, whatever. it is to experience how they relate to their space, and how they relate to their community, and i am allowing them to do that, through movement, through improvisational games basically, through structures that i give them. and so—so my thing is not so much... sometimes it does, i do get commissioned to do a performance in a site-specific place, but the gist of my company is not about working with artists, it’s about working with anybody. and hmm, just facilitating this thing. oh, i forgot what you were asking. (-laughs-) : okay. okay. : hmm. : hmm. : the common goal. yes. yes. yes... it's about exploring the environment that we live in, whatever it’s to them that day. the environment and the community, and how the community influences the environment, how the environment influences the community. and can we make that? can we change that? by doing these movement and ideas that give them structures, can we change the way we’re relating to our environment, in a more productive way perhaps? can the—does the environment become more interesting to us, because we're now learning about it? a lot of times people are in an environment like this, where they have no idea when this building was built, they don't know anything about it. it just looks like a boring office center, who knows what it is. so my job is, before i get there, i do research and i find out something about it and i look at it and i, you know, i get some kind of a sense of how can we approach this space. that will be interesting, and give people a new insight into where they are every day and... or if they've never been there, you know, give them an insight into what is the space that we're in, and how can that influence how i feel right now, how i feel about the people i’m with, and how i'm relating to the space. maybe sustainably, maybe not, you know. sometimes sustainability comes in, sometimes not. it's about invigorating people and, you know, into appreciating the space that they have. or you know, it can be all different things, but basically, those are the two… the three core things are community, environment, through movement. : hmm i just … it was just sort of a gradual progression from the site specific work that i have done with others, and i did site-specific work myself—performance work, and then i just sort of—you know, actually i was talking to a friend who was interested in going around and taking photographs and video of me working or like probing in different spaces. : and so he was more interested in the photography aspect, and i was interested in the—in the architectural stuff, in the, you know, performance aspect. and—and—and i've already been doing that for a long time, and then i just kind of got these ideas that well, maybe—maybe this can be tied together in some way, and i was—and i already also been a teacher for a long time. so just kind of taking all of these disparate elements and ideas that i was working with, and putting them together into an idea, where i could offer something to these people. : uh huh. : i kind of do. i mean, i keep track of all the projects that i do, and i’m big one for making lists and hmm, i also keep track of the hours it takes me to finish a project, just… yeah, i do. because that also helps me budget, figure out what my—my rate should be and all that stuff. and that’s—that's hard, especially for independent artists, is to figure out initially, because you don't have any... nobody will tell you “oh i'm doing this for this amount of money,” so you know, you kind of have to figure that out yourself. so i keep track of how many hours it takes me to do things and hmm, but also it's very variable. so sometimes i'll do—my company is called [company name 1: the participant's company] so sometimes i'll do, you know, two [company name 1] projects a year, and sometimes i'll do five. and it just depends, and it depends how big the project is. and you know, whether it's just a one-day workshop, or whether it’s a three-week workshop... it's very variable. so i do keep track, but i don’t… it's not the number of things. project is more the number—the amount of constant work. that is, creating... you know, and that's pretty constant, you know, whether or not it’s getting ready for project or, you know, site, or the wrap-up, all that stuff. that's pretty constant, regardless of how many there are.  : i do it all the time. i do it all the time. i always kind of revise my work. i revise the way i talk about it all the time, because i get better—i get more clear about what it is, like every time i do. like the first—the first keyhole project that i did, i probably was talking about it really differently, and more i did… and the more i do, the more i understand what it is. that is pretty—it's pretty… i still have that problem—people like “what do you do?” “what is this?” “what do you do?” “ what is this project?” “so are you teaching a dance class?” i'm like, “no, no.” so it's kind of a little hard to quantify, but i've got a lot better at it, being concrete about it. and i am continuously finding better ways of saying it, and better ways of thinking about it, and get clear on who it's for, and who would benefit the most, and all that stuff. yeah, all the time.  : yeah. : yeah. it doesn't really go from one but yeah. yeah i mean, it goes from like five to… yeah, i don’t know what's the biggest one. maybe 50? yeah it's—yeah, it's very variable and that's great, that's fine. i like that. : i don't know. i mean it's hard to say because i'm not—i'm not doing the kind of thing, and i'm not saying that i'm the only one doing this, but—but i'm not—i'm not dancing for somebody else's company anymore. i'm not just being a choreographer. i'm not just producing my own work and then doing it myself. i mean, i used to—i had a company of performers, but i don’t have a company right now, so it's a little hard to say. i suppose like—i don't have a full-time teaching job right now, which i did, so i'm not teaching every day, and so i'm not in that category. but—but i would say that i think i am probably in the middle. i think that there are people that are working more than me, and they probably have actual, you know, like they're working for someone in a company. they are not kind of independent contractors; they’re working more than me; they have a job. you know that they're not their own boss. and then i think there are people definitely working less than me, because they’re, you know, for whatever reason. i think i work a lot, but i think i'm not probably not the most productive. but i—but i'm as productive as i want to be. : uh huh. : hmm i think i'm pretty balanced—right brain, left brain, whatever that means. i know that’s not a thing anymore, but i'm very—i’m very logical, but i'm also pretty hmm, i don’t know if intuitive is the right word, but you know, open to flow or whatever. and i think that balance maybe something that helps me. i mean, i know a lot of artists—i know a lot of artists who are very, you know, intuitive, but they don't have the structure to make that happen. so i think the balance between the structure and the creatives is very important to me. i can actually get things done, you know, after i have the idea. (-laughs-) what else? i’m pretty like—i said before i’m pretty stubborn, so if i decide that this is something i'm going to do, then i’m just going to do it until i am not interested in it anymore, not until somebody tells me i can't do it. so it doesn’t mean anything to me. but i will probably lose interest at some point, yeah. : i'm pretty focused. i can often—someone interrupts me during a conversation or something, and like ten minutes later i can come right back to it, to where i was. i’m pretty focused. and like in other ways too, but\ : no. i'm really good at remembering, yeah. : no.  : hmm. : i—i think it's a combination. i think i'm uninhibited in terms of caring about what other people think. you know, like i guess that's uninhibited. maybe not i am uninhibited, but i'm not blatant. does that make sense? a lot of people who are, you say are uninhibited, they show that. i don’t tend to show that, but the truth is, i am uninhibited, but people don't know that about me, which is kind of maybe a weird combination, but so i'm kind of reserved, but i'm actually uninhibited. : i really just want what i want, and i will go for that. : and i'm not—i don't really—i don't have much of a... i mean you know, i care what people think, everybody does, but i care less what people think of me probably than—than what i think of me, what i think of what i'm doing... not that. i don't think uninhibited means that you don't have any values; that’s a different thing. but the values that i have aren’t based on whether i'm going to embarrass myself, or you know\ : that's not really a thing for me, because i've been a performer for a long time, and that it's not embarrassing, because i have experience doing it, you know. so yeah, i just—it’s hmm… i don’t really—i don't have those—those notions of “you're not supposed to do this here,” or like, you know. my first thought i have when i walked to a public space and i see a cool wall is like “can i climb up the wall?” : it's just… i might not do it, but that's my first thought, you know, so i don't have those barriers. : i don't think they would. and i'm not really—i'm not impulsive, but i am open, i would say.  : no. i don't think so. : no.  : i think i'm more open. i'm more able to allow things to happen, rather than trying to make them happen. and i just—and that’s just a skill, the learned skill, to be comfortable with unknowns. i’m much more comfortable with unknowns, and i’m willing to write out the journey, instead of having a journey in mind.  : i guess just… i think it's really important for humans to be creative. and i think everyone is, but somehow people gets convinced that they aren’t. and you know, it's in all of us, because we all have that brain capacity to be creating things, and you know, formulating and exploring. it's an exploration, it is what it is. creativity is just exploring ideas and coming up with solutions, and you know, allowing things to occur to you, and not saying no to them, you know. and i think a lot of people get convinced that they need to say no, which is really unfortunate, you know, it's a shame. because people—everyone is creative. an office worker is creative. at some point in your day, everyone is creative, they have to solve something in a way that they didn’t think about it. so it’s not like—it’s not just artists. and the problem is, people who don't think they're creative look at people who they think are creative, and then say, "that's something else. that's something that we don't understand, and that i can't do that" "i can't.” like a lot of people say to me, “oh i can’t dance," and that's ridiculous. everyone can dance, you know. you just get up and move, and you are dancing. but whatever. and it puts a barrier between those who say no, and those who have said yes, and it makes it part of the reason why i mean, there’s a lot of culturally… that’s going on, but it’s part of the reason why art people are always trying to fight that battle of, you know, acceptance. and this is important to the world, and we need to support this and all that stuff, because it really should be part of everyone's life. i think this country’s much worse than many other countries, but it’s part of everyone’s life. it's a human trait to be creative. and to separate creative people from whatever, seriously whatever they want to call it—non-creative—is ridiculous, and alienating for both sides. it's a barrier; it’s false barrier. and mostly i mean, i do totally believe in personal responsibility, but a lot of it is you know, is the educational system of not allowing that from the start. i went to very experiential schools. i was very lucky to be put in that kind of environment. a lot of people don't have that, you know. and you are just—from the very beginning, you are in a situation where you are being told to sit down for six hours a day—don't move. that's totally foreign. it’s not human to be in a chair for six hours that’s at five years old. you know, that’s crazy. so i think that kind of… it gets instilled very early, and some people break out, some people don't. and it's just really sad that it's a part of how we're living our lives. : hm. -laughs- you mean everything or related to work? : this is a very hard question because... what is the... well i think that the best thing that i do every day in my life is being a father. so, it is not a specific thing that i have done in my life, but it is something that i do every day, so. : i think that i'm good at raising up my children and i think that i'm quite balanced in being lovely with them and helpful and even an educating figure. : well usually i don’t like very much changes, so the biggest change that i remember and in the recent years, was moving to [country 1] from [country 2]. so, moving here was not easy, not from a practical point of view, but it was a hard decision. so, yeah, -laughs- maybe taking the decision of moving from [country 2] to [country 1]. maybe it was the hardest decision in my life. it was not exactly an obstacle, but i don’t know if it is a good answer. : yeah, i thought about all the advantages of moving and it was hard to leave everything that i had behind in [country 2], especially of course friends, family, my parents, my - but after all i thought that it was better, and the balance was positive moving here, especially for kids. i think that this is a better place here for them to grow up, so in the end, my wife and i decided to move here. : a particular project? : no actually, it was everything quite natural. because when i was about to graduate, i got a proposal for a phd, then i accepted without thinking too much. then i started doing research. then i had the opportunity to move - to visit for [university 1] in 2008 for one month. and actually, i didn’t want to come because - but that was a big - i think that that was a key point in my life because i met my current advisor. so i met him in 2008, and after, in 2015 i met him again and he proposed me to come for a postdoc here. yeah, so i think that yeah coming here for one month which i didn’t want to do was a key point yeah. : uh yeah. i'm working actually on a specific project, which can help me moving into the industry. i'm working on a system for question answering in natural language, you know, that computers are not able to process natural language. they use structured language, okay? and the computer have a lot of data in the structured format but people, common people, not computer scientists, are not able to extract information using complex languages, languages understood by computers. so what i'm doing is a system that translates the natural language into a formal language for computer and this is of interest for several companies, such as google. so this could be a project could help me moving towards something different. anyway, as i told you before i'm not very inclined in changing so, if they think i need to move to industry i'm i don’t know if i’m scared yeah. : yeah. : uh, if we were in [country 1], i would say not start –laughs- don’t start doing research because the situation in the research field in [country 1] is not very good. anyway, here it is different. and i would suggest to be focused on practical problems and problems with the practical relevance. actually, there are many researchers in my field who propose very abstract techniques. i don’t like this very much because, yeah, you can invent propose lot of techniques but they need to have practical relevance, otherwise they are just ideas. they are just papers, they are not useful for people, so. : sorry? : i would advise not to specialize too early, yeah, but neither too late, of course. so i think that during the second part of a phd, becoming more specialized would be the right moment. anyway, i think that later everyone should be try to change sometimes. yeah, the field of research, of course, a computer scientist would be always a computer scientist, but he shouldn’t be stuck on a specific field of research for all his life. and actually, there was a moment in my life in which i decided to leave research because i have been studying the same topics for too long time and i was bored, i became bored about them and then i changed them. i found a new interest in research. : well, actually, my current advisor had an ideam he had an ideam the idea to developing what i told you before, the system of translating natural language into structured language. and i like this idea very much and then i improved his ideas and so what was your - ? : i would suggest the problem. : i don’t think it is important to be involved –laughs- at least not for everyone. no, not for everyone. i think the research in computer science, it is important because computers can help especially can help in provide the information that people need. so... so yeah, for practical reasons yeah it is important to do research. : yeah. : well, i think both... i've always done my job even when i didn’t like the job i was doing for responsibility. anyway, currently i also like what i'm doing, so in general for responsibility currently mainly it because i like it, yeah.  : no, no, no. mainly because - yeah, you know, i'm a computer scientist. i've worked, i've developed the systems also for companies, which is different job that i'm doing research, okay, and so when i had to work for companies i tried to do my best mainly for responsibility. when i do research i try to do my best mainly because i like it. i like what i do  : yeah. : no, actually, very good question. yeah, no, i had to apply and i had to, yeah. i was examined so yeah. but actually, in[country 1], for phd students, the students who graduate usually apply just because they are proposed to apply, you know. if you apply without being proposed to apply you usually will not be accepted in the university : yeah, yeah. he's great source of inspiration continuously, yeah, he's a great person. : yeah, yeah. : well actually i was participating in a project in [country 1] which required to visit for some time for a university. since my advisor in [country 1] was new, my current, he asked him if i could come here for one month and that’s why i came here and it is interesting, the fact that my current advisor was also the advisor of my advisor in italy. : of course, many years ago. : sorry? : he is continually continuously inspiring me and he understands very quickly all the issues with the research we are conducting and he has great ideas. the only problem is that i need some time in order to understand his ideas. -laughs- maybe, i think - what was he saying? i don’t know. and maybe after one or two weeks of work i reach his same conclusion, yeah, so he is great, really great. : yeah... well actually all colleagues in some way have influenced me. i think that in a team, in a research team people influence each other. so, but specifically, no, i think that the most influence i got the most influence from my current advisor, yeah. : yeah, i - well i don’t like very much to advise other people, but i like when other people want to be advised by me. in italy i was a lecturer of information systems. i had an opportunity to be the thesis advisor for about fifty students. i like to work with some of them very much. when i see that people are interested in what they do, i like to advise them. but i don’t like to force people to be interested in something yeah if they are interested, i'm not interested, as well. i mean i don’t want to force people in finding interest in something in which they are not interested. : well usually i try always to –laughs- okay i don’t try to usually to guide them towards the right way or at least the way that is right in my mind. i try to help them to find the right way by themselves and, uh, yeah, that's it : how do i do that? i think that using the socratic method, -laughs - yeah, making them reason about the problem and trying to suggest where they reason not correctly and but without telling them the truth, i mean the correct reason. i try to make them reach the correct reason by themselves, yeah, by reasoning together about issues. : yeah, usually, yeah. again, i can tell if someone is going to be a successful or not. : how can i tell? how can i tell if something is going\ : well, there are two components, i guess. some, one component, i think that just feeling is something that cannot be explained. the other component is easier. if you see that someone can reason in a logical way, so probably he will be successful. if his ideas are really interesting, original, and consistent with the problem he needs to solve, then he will be successful. otherwise he won't. and yeah.  : i don’t know. i notice the statistics say that there are much more male researchers in computer science, but i don’t know if on what it depends. maybe it is just the women are less interested in computer science or. : yeah, yeah. during my phd i had a colleague who has very, very capable. very good computer scientist, yeah. a female colleague, of course. : i think that it was very relevant when i was a child they continuously stimulated me in intellectual activities, so i think that was the start –laughs- of becoming the man who i am now. yeah.  : well, for instance, mainly doing games. i like the intellectual games you know which stuff like this. i've learned to play chess when i was nine, i guess. i don’t know. i don't know how to play chess anymore –laughs- and... yeah, having some scientific books at home helped me. i was curious and i started reading i remember a chemistry book when i was i don’t know seven, eight, and that impressed me. i remember that impressed me very much. some stuff about atoms. yeah. i think that the context my family, the context was very important for developing my... my passion for science. : yeah, but they are not inclined to science like me. : yeah, i would say that they are creative. yeah, they don’t do research but in a way they are creative, yeah. : yeah, yeah. yes, i would say they're definitely creative. : well, usually my ideas come from the observation of the problems. looking at the research and the research trends, yeah, usually i can understand it. but well, well everyone can understand what current brains in the research fields are, yeah, usually i try to set the - to study the problems, to think about the current problems and to find the solution yeah so. : no, mostly reading. reading and studying. usually i don’t talk much with other people and i read papers but most of the time i think by myself. : this is very important. rationality, anyway. i think that in every process of creativity, rationality s important. but at some point there is something which is not rational, like a sparkle which comes without knowing how why. usually when i think problem, when i'm stuck on a problem, thinking about the problem doesn’t help me very much at a certain point, when i'm not thinking to a problem oh i can do this yes so, i don’t know how it happens. : how often? : i don’t think there is a precise frequency. yeah... i don’t know. i think that i have good ideas, just kind of irrational, not guided, not the depending on rationality ideas. once every two to three months. i mean which becomes something meaningful not just ideas or i could like - i could do this great thing and yeah this not –inaudible, 32:19- : i don’t know, so, yes. : it is very important. i cannot work without a goal. : i think so. i don’t follow a list of instructions, of course, but yeah usually the strategy is understanding problem as well as i can. then thinking to the problem. and if this is simple problem then i can find the solution very easily, otherwise i need to wait i need to wait for the spark or. : no, no. : usually symbols, formulas, not words. : no... usually i mathematically model the problem so i don’t need words. -laughs- i need formulas and symbols. : sorry? : yeah, yeah. it happens. : i don’t know. i would like to know –laughs- but i have no idea. i think that the... my situation... my contextual situation influences this moments of many ideas or no ideas but i don’t know i really don't know. : family, for instance.  : everything else. my personal life. but i'm not sure maybe that it is also the opposite, i don’t know. : about ten hours. : very often. i think that i take a five minute break every hour. : in any what? : -laughs- yeah, i used to have a lot of hobbies. some years ago. now, currently, my hobbies is just going to see attractions with my family. : museums, for instance, or, uh, places where kids can enjoy. yeah.  : no. : um, i don’t think so. picasso was creative just because he invented cubism. : but once you invented cubism, you can do millions of works, you just need time. of course, it is not exactly - as i say, of course, there are every artwork has its story, but the way that the most important creative aspect of picasso was not each single artwork i think that creating a new form of art, yeah. : can you repeat the question? : yeah, yeah, yeah. i think this is very important, yeah. i know that picasso didn’t start as cubist - i don’t know how to say it - with cubism, yeah. that i think that, yeah, experimenting is important in order to find something really interesting. it’s the same in science, not just in art, yeah. i think that you need to try to even in computer science maybe you have a problem usually you try several solutions they don’t work immediately that you try and then you find original interesting solution yeah. it’s the same for art. of course, i think that you need in art, i think that anyway you need to have it - that solution inside you, and then by trying you can pull it out. : i have no idea. -laughs- : yeah. when i know\ : i don’t know. never. -laughs- with research you're never done you can always add something to improve your solution : i think about the same. i know that i produce much less than other people. there are some people who have an incredible productivity and i have not that productivity. anyway, this also true that i like to completely solve a problem when i start working on a problem. instead other people just propose the solution, okay, i publish the paper else try to do something else. and no i stay quite long a single problem. : well, i have to say that some of the most interesting solution that i proposed that came from combining different ideas, different techniques. taking from different problems. and how do i do it? i don’t know. i think that, of course, i need to be very familiar with the techniques i combine and it is not - i don’t think that it is a matter of memory, a problem of memory. it is just a mainly of problem of being familiar, being capable to handle, very well, the techniques that you combine. of course, you can be familiar with something you don’t remember. : yeah, yeah, yeah. exactly. : yeah. : no, i don’t think i have any special traits. : i am both. -laughs- there are some moments in which i am very focused, in other moments i am distractible. and i have to say, that when i'm focused, of course my productivity increases. this is quite obvious, i guess.  : no, no. especially for details. as you said before, i remember that techniques exist. i'm able to understand that i should use one technique, but when i need to use it i need to study it again to recall the details. i'm not good with details. : no. : i think i'm more inhibited. : no, inhibited. : yeah, yeah, definitely. : no. : maybe i used to be, i'm not obsessive anymore. : no, no. eh... no, i don’t think so. : how is my work is now different the way it was when i started?... well i think that now i'm able to propose less ideas than when i've started but when i started i used to propose uninteresting –laughs- ideas. i used to come up with several, but few of them were good. now, i usually don’t come up with –laughs- bad ideas. i just - i don’t know, maybe i developed a filter for ideas, yeah. so, i think that is the main difference. maybe i'm now capable of understanding quickly when an idea is not good. find out i’m not wrong, otherwise i will drop some good ideas, but i don’t think so.  : can you - i missed the first part of your question. : i think that the most important part of creativity is the spark of which we already talked. so, if you want me to mention something about we haven't talked about, i should think about - : yeah, i can think a moment... yeah, i mentioned it shortly, but maybe i can say something more about the fact that i think that creativity needs that sparkle that not rational moment okay or with in every process. but anyway, in each, in every field creativity must be supported by rationality, even in art or music, for instance. some years ago, a lot of years ago actually, twenty years ago, i composed some music, yeah. and maybe that process of creativity is more important than the process of creativity in research and you start feeling something you need to be inspired by something than i used to with my guitar to compose the main line of the music and then, for instance, in order to make the music beautiful you need to arrange it with harmony, with other instruments. and that, and then, for that aim, i used the rationality because music is based on mathematics. you need - there are some intervals which you need to follow, so i used to combine the inspiration with rationality and i think that in every field rationality is important. completely irrational art is not art for me. i don’t know and rationality, because i think that art must be appreciated by most people not just by the artist who create the art and i think that the element which makes art appreciated by all the people is the rationality in the sense that it is something in common between people and this something in common i think that it is rational, not irrational. i don’t know how to explain it very well. for instance, do you know fontana? fontana is an artist who used to cut the canvas. you have a canvas with some color, for instance a blue canvas, you cut it, okay? and the value of this artwork is billions. i don’t think that is art because it is just an expression of his feelings, but that feelings are not shared among all the people. so, when a feeling is too irrational, maybe it is too personal. and in that sense, i don’t think you can do art if you do something that is valuable not in terms of money it is valuable just for you. i think that the importance in creativity it is important to have the inspiration, the rational process, and to produce something which is objectively appreciated by everyone. : my phd. : my work ethic and my parents. : well, they were the ones who taught me my work ethic. : molecular biology : my mental health. -laughs- : i got on medication to help me through it. well, mental health and migraines i should say. medication has helped significantly with the migraines. but um, focusing on goals. : yeah, i am very goal-oriented. if i don't have an endpoint, i am not very motivated.  : not particularly. i've always been interested - i do cancer research and i've always been interested in cancer. my undergraduate project – well, i guess the research i did as an undergraduate.  : just like everybody else does. -laughs- undergraduate thesis project. : no, i applied only to cancer labs even as an undergraduate.  : everybody has asked me. i am fascinated by the molecular biology.  so, actual the pathways and how they work in a normal and a healthy cell and what it is in cancer that makes it bypass all of the checkpoints that have evolved from millions of years and allow that cell to survive when evolution says that it should not. : -laughs- thank you! : in terms of the molecular biology, my understanding as an undergraduate was very superficial and since i've continued, it's gotten more in depth and advanced.  : yeah. : don’t. that one's hard. with the whole – i mean, you're not going to get – with how the grant and funding situation is, it's really hard.  the suggest i would be is to find a research project that actually excites them and a lab environment that they want to be in because it's going to be miserable, so you better enjoy it as much as you can. : i've been lucky in the lab that i've been in. when i was in a situation that i did not like, even then it wasn’t that bad. but then again i've been very lucky in the labs that i've found. : i wouldn’t necessarily say i'm an outlier. i know a lot of people that did not find the right situation. i couldn’t give you a percentage, but i'm not an outlier but i know the other side of the coin is very, very common.   : to me, that's a strong - that is still a strong word. i know a lot of people who love the lab they are in, who love the project they are working on. but like i said though, i know a lot of people the other way. yeah, i'm sorry.  : i think i work hard.  i think my brain works in a very specific way that is very beneficial for the work that i do. and i do think my brain works in a different way than most people and my bosses would agree. i've always had very good reviews from my bosses.  : so, the best way to describe that is that my favorite word in every language is why. it's that - which pisses a lot of people off and that's why i did this study. because, when most people would accept it, oh well scientists say you're this or that or even reading a paper, my brain goes further of what they found why is that? and i am very good at designing an experiment specifically to address that point, i believe. that's how my brain works differently. when people accept an answer, i go one step farther to try and understand why that answer the way it is.  : uh, i was raised by a family - my mother has a phd in biochemistry, my grandfather has an md, my father is very skeptical and i was raised in a very male dominated society. so, that - and i was raised in a - i went to a very religious high school and so i saw a lot of people just accepting the way things were and saw how unhappy they were. so, most of my life and even outside of my – even within my personal life i tend to push the boundaries a little more than most –laughs-. : i have a younger brother : uh, yeah, he's the, um, - do you know [music festival]? : okay, so the [region] - so there's a company that puts on [music festival]. he's the executive creative director of the company that puts on the music festivals up in [region].  : so, he's the musician, he's creative.  : you mean? : well so i did all of the girl scouts, piano, dance, all of the sports. um, but i also - my father is a polo instructor so i played polo for all for my life and traveled for most of my life, so yeah. : oh, yeah, definitely. : -laughs- i hate to say this but you know i was married when i did - i was not married when i did graduate school and my first post doc. i got married just before my second post doc and i have seen that being married has definitely taken time away from the lab. i mean i hate saying it but, yes, the fewer social interactions you have the more productive you are in lab. are you a post doc? : oh, okay. : i was gonna say, feel kind of weird saying this to you. :  are you a grad student?  : good luck. -laughs- : well, no, i mean no, not necessarily. because having a release definitely helps so there's a fine balance in like i said, i still play polo and i need that to keep me sane and functional but it does take me away from the lab so it’s a fine balance of you need those social interactions but the more you have the more time it is away from lab. : find it. uh, i don’t know. i don’t give advice. : find something that, when you're not in lab you can throw yourself into wholeheartedly, in other words you cannot think about your lab. and then find something in lab that when you are in lab you aren't thinking about - essentially find a way to separate, so that what you are doing takes up everything and it gives your brain a break from the other things. i like the two circles yes.  : i don’t really think it matters. i really - i know people who right out of undergraduate, went to grad school and both were - both didn’t succeed and succeeded. actually, that's not true. the people that i know who specialized later in life, particularly even went back to graduate school later in life, they wanted it more so they tended to do better whereas the people who tended to start earlier did it because there was nothing else available to them. : i don’t even know what that means. : oh, that question – the answer has two parts. i think that the periphery, outside have more rewards if they succeed but in terms of funding they care more about is there preliminary data to prove this? so, it’s two part thing i don’t really know if that’s the answer you're looking for.  : yeah, it's definitely a challenge so much so that i'm considering leaving research. -laughs- cause it's very frustrating, um, so yeah. : you mean cancer research? molecular biology? what is the benefit to mankind? : well, yeah, i mean obviously for disease, biomedical research is all based upon disease. um understanding how the human body works. i don’t actually know if it'll make us happier but it'll definitely make us live longer. i think your job makes us happier um but i just i don’t know like i said i don’t why you wanna know why i'm a little obsessive about it. that’s why people should get involved so we understand. i don’t have a better answer. i'm sorry  : probably it's just yeah, the word 'religion' and 'magic' and all of that kind of stuff kind of piss me off because it’s a cover-all blanket and whether or not there is a god, there is still a physiological reason for it, you know. i don't care what you believe in but it still happens somehow and it just bothers me to not know how. : yeah : uh, there have been times when i didn’t want, pardon my french, i didn’t want to put up with the shit. it goes with understanding and there have been times where i get very frustrated because i think, you know, there are so many people working on this and we are just picking at these tiny little pieces and we're not actually understanding the big picture. : and i get very, very frustrated, yes. and that’s where i am right now. i've never left and i most likely probably won't. i'm probably just venting for the last couple of months. but yeah, i definitely get frustrated and get less intensely involved. : i find that i actually – i find that the reason, typically, one of the reason why i'm there now, is because i am stretching myself too thin that’s why i say with my outside things and my body and my brain just physically can't do everything and i find that if i take a step back from everything and refresh, then i'm able to come back with and be as motivated as i like to be. : my graduate school mentor.  : she - which she is - was very much - she's very much the student sinks or swims of their own accord, which works very, very well with me. a lot of people i know it didn't work well with, but she was also very supportive of my outside life. um, she was very as a person she is an amazing person but she supported me. i had a very unusual admission into graduate school and she saw how much i wanted it and she supported me the entire way. : she was actually the one i did my undergraduate work with. : so, yeah.  : in life or in science?  : well, in science she taught me almost everything that i know in terms of experimental design, in terms of how to write, in terms of almost everything. in life, she taught me that, and this sounds very cliché, but that you can have it all and she was a full professor but she had her family outside, she had this great farm that she ran with her horses, she was very close to her family, but at the same time she was still extremely successful. : can have everything, yes, sorry, yes, can have everything. : i would talk to her about almost everything, obviously barring sex and bodily functions. it was still a professional relationship in that i would not go cry to her when i was sad, but i was very, very comfortable with her obviously workwise. i was able to talk to her about everything professionally. she actually she predicted i would be unhappy in my first post doc and i was miserable. um, but i still am in contact with her and go back to visit her.  : she's back in [state] where i did graduate school.  : well, my mother had her phd in biochemistry. she was a professor at [university 1]. and my grandfather was an md, he was a professor at the [university 2]. um, and so like i mean i remember when i was a kid at five years old my mom would take me into her lab and i would play with - play on the  floor of her lab, so yeah.  : oh, yeah.  : because it’s the same - it’s the sharing of knowledge. it's - why am i doing all of this work if the knowledge is not being shared. i want people to get as much joy out of understanding the world as i do. no, teaching is very – i actually do teach. it's very important to me.  : to always question, to never just accept, to never accept an answer, to always dig deeper to try to understand it, you know. is that commercial actually telling you the truth and is that urban myth really real to why do we get cancer?  : um, i can tell if they're not going to be successful. i can't tell that they're going to be successful but i can tell when they're not going to be successful.  : again, their lack of independent thought. when i ask them a question and i either they repeat back to me the exact words that i just said or they give me a blank stare. when they don't ask me questions back, those are definitely signs of them not going to make it. if people do have independent thought and do question, that’s not a guarantee that they're going to make it but, yeah.  : in terms of abilities? no. in terms of outside social responsibilities? i mean, unfortunately, yes. : women tend to be pulled away by family, by kids, by husbands and that’s just society we are taught as women that we are not supposed to work eighty hours a week, but it's totally acceptable for the man to work eighty hours a week... and they've actually shown those studies. they’ve actually shown that in graduate school the male to female ratio is about fifty percent, as you get into a post-doc the male to female ratio fifty-five to forty-five percent, but as you start to get into ten-year track positions, it's much more highly male dominated and the studies have shown that it has nothing to do with ability it has everything to do with women drop out sometimes in their thirties and forties, just as my mother did, to take of their -inaudible, 21:31- families. : what do you mean personal or professional identity? : i wanna say, yes but i can't think of anything. that makes me sound really, really bad but no, sorry.  : well that’s not true my husband is definitely - he helps me. i can be very intense and he helps – helps pull me back and makes me realize, hey there's another life outside here to enjoy  : no : well, reading obviously. i mean reading the literature that's the big one. but again just questioning. i many times will sit at home and think about this study that i read or this thing that i talked to, i mean its yeah the outside questions as i process the literature. : that's hard. i mean i hate to say it, but funding is a big one. but it's always something that i think will have an impact on patient quality or quantity of life. if there is no translational aspect of it, i tend to pass it by.  : oh, yeah. : i take a break  : i mean it depends. sometimes i've taken three-month breaks, sometimes i've just take a weekend. but typically, it entails me going outside, going back to nature, getting away from people, spending time with my horses, spending time with my dog um and just forgetting about all two-legged creatures. : extremely : i don't - well, intuition, so again, i don’t really believe in intuition even if you have a feeling, there is some rational thought behind it. so, intuition is great but it has to be backed up by something to suggest that you might actually be right and or a person has to go test it out. but rationale - rational thought is everything.  : yes and no. it is methodical in that i work very hard to make sure that all of the controls are there the reagent i'm using is in fact correct, but it's not - i don’t, you know, in terms of documentation and crap like that i tend to be a little - i tend to do shorthand. i do a lot of shorthand. but no, i don’t follow the - i ask the questions that based upon my reading and thought process are interesting.  : so, if i have - if i want to know something the very first thing that i do is i do research to see what is known, if somebody's already asked that question what is it we understand?  and from there, i - so because i do signaling, i do pathways and so i physically draw out the pathway of interest that i am interested in and i do hell of a lot of reading, in terms of where the pathway is. and then from there, i'm able to kind of say, well what don't we know? where are the questions? and then from there i'm able to say, okay well, if i inhibit this what will i do here? or if i activate this, what will that do here from - i'm a visual person in that i physically need to see the pathway and once i have that pathway down i can actually start to identify where i should be asking questions. : oh, so then i actually find the reagents and find the cells and all that kind of stuff and actually test it  : yeah, the pathway. : oh, all the time. : yeah.  : um, -laughs- that depends upon my boss. i will not publish unless i know for a fact that it's accurate. i would never ever, ever, ever publish something that i am not one-hundred percent certain of, and this has nothing to do with creativity and i'm sorry, because of the current situation with funding and with publishing, a study has to be one-hundred percent – one-hundred-and-ten percent complete. and that also does drive me a little nuts in that i've proved it and then you send it off to somebody and they say oh well what about this oh what about that. you know, that’s not what i was looking at. it's a very cutthroat environment right now, at least in my field.  : yeah. : yeah it's – yeah, like i said that why i'm - it's very, very frustrating. um, it stems from also typically the people who are reviewing your work are not the pis, they are the graduate students and post docs and they do it to impress their boss, like "look i can find all of these problems in this work!" so, yeah.  : oh yeah. : i mean, i don't know. it's not uncommon but it's not like something that happens every single time. it depends on what i'm working on and all of that kind of stuff i definitely have, "oh that’s the experiment i should do!" type of stuff.  : yeah. : yeah.  : yeah, yeah. yes, they so - they typically are when i am just sitting and relaxing. typically, not when i'm like focused, not when i'm doing something else. if i'm in between a game or if i'm just sitting and reading i daydream quite a bit.  : um, i typically get between six to eight. i don't actually function well on less with my migraines.  : it’s a physiological issue. : no, yeah if i get six to eight, i mean every, you know, every two or three weeks i will - i need – every two to three weeks i need a day off, though, to where i don't do anything. i don’t sleep, i just read or watch television or - i need that.  : yeah. : so, in terms of experiments, i do my best work in the morning. in terms of writing and reading and thinking, i actually do my best work at night. so, kind of strange. : actually, running them. actually, in the lab, physically doing the experiments. i need - i mean they are so intensive that if i am - and i know this, if i have a migraine, if i am tired, if i am hungry, i will almost always screw up my experiment. um, in terms of reading and writing, i don't break well so that if i'm writing here and then i go home it's really, really hard for me to start, but if i work at home and if i start kind of after my brain has woken up i can work straight through.  : yeah. -laughs- : i hate saying it, but i prefer to work alone. : yeah. i like having people know my work and i like being able to discuss it with them, but i don't like being dependent upon somebody else.  : i almost always end up leading. i hate saying that, but i'm a control freak. : i have to delegate otherwise i go a little nuts and its really, really hard – so, i delegate i let somebody - i say "you do this", i let them do it, and when they screw it up, then i just take it over.  : sorry, it sounds really bad. -laughs-  : i'm very goal oriented, like i need to know why i'm doing something. i don't aimlessly work well  : it's not always very clear, but i definitely have a goal in mind  : and as i work it becomes – as i work - so when i start the goal it isn't always necessarily as clear, but i know i'm working towards understanding. it's as simple as working to understand this pathway. : and then as i work it becomes - the goal becomes more and more solidified. : um, i go for a lot of walks. : yeah, yeah. : no, i just use a pen – a notebook and i got loose little pieces of paper everywhere. aside from the internet, obviously, for the actual literature search, that one's obvious, yeah. : that's the starting point. i don't typically go back to a sketch and erase and change it. i just make a new one. : oh yeah. : oh, yeah. : most likely it has to do with my energy and stress levels. : so, when you say "work", are you saying actual experiments or thinking about work, because those are two different\ : okay. uh, again, it ebbs and flows. when i am nearing the end of a goal it's one-hundred percent, i mean it's eighty hours a week, plus, when i'm nearing the end. um, it's everything. in the beginning and in the middle, when i'm kind of struggling and trying to figure out where i'm going, then it's definitely much, much less, it's forty hours a week. then it's just a normal thing, but... somewhere in the back of my brain i'm always coming back to something. it might not be focused, but it's always coming back to " well, what do i do now?" "where do i take this type of thing?" : yeah. : that would be more in the beginning.  : yeah, well, i don’t know if this is going to pan out, so i'm not even going to waste my time. but towards the ends, it's like "i gotta know, i gotta know" : well it - because i do biology, even i would say my work influences my outside activities, not the other way around. in that i see my dog do something and i think oh what is the evolutionary mechanism that led her to do that, um, that type of a thing? and so, i use that, like i said the questioning is what allows me to understand - like even with polo what is the physiologically most efficient way of hitting this ball type of thing. but the-  for how my outside influences it, it's my break i need it. but i don’t necessarily take inspiration. i don’t see my dog do something and think "oh, that’s why!" yeah. : uh, it sounds, okay, it sounds right in terms of productivity. in terms of creativity, at least in my field, the most creative and unique ideas don't actually have direct studies that came before them. it’s the - does that make sense? : it's the truly novel ideas, yeah like i said, i can't speak to other fields, but in terms of creativity for me it’s - the truly creative studies are the ones to where you think "how in god's name did they come up with that hypothesis?" : yeah, i can definitely see how. 'ike i said, i - no idea comes from nowhere, so there was obviously something. it might not have been an obvious – they - to the person who came up with the hypothesis was an obvious correlation and in retrospect it's an obvious correlation, but to other people it's not always an obvious correlation. but yes, i definitely do agree, it definitely makes sense that the more that there is behind, the easier it is to - essentially, the more that's behind the easier it is to build from. : you're never done with your work, sorry. you're never done. : yeah.  : yeah, i generally have to be pulled off of a project, but even once you publish there should be a second and third and fourth paper. : the only reason that i left a project is because i left the lab. : yeah, number of publications, number of experiments, again, yeah. : uh, i think it depends on where i am in my mental state. um, when i - i think i'm average. when i am slow, i think i'm average and when i am, uh, motivated and when i'm excited, i think i'm slightly above average. there are definitely more people that are much more productive than me, though.  : i hated those tests. : i guess that, for me, it's drawing. i will read a paper and i will draw the pathway, and then i'll read a paper and i will draw the pathway, and then i'll read a paper and i will draw the pathway. and i will merge those pathways into my own original pathway. : uh, that's – so, based upon what i know of other people, yes, but to me it's normal. so, no. so, i think that i'm normal. i think that no, i don’t see anything differently than anybody else because i think that everybody else sees the world the same ways as i do, but based on my husband's response to me, and my friends responses to me, and my colleagues responses to me, yes. i see it differently but i don’t know what the hell it is. : sorry! : no, i'm sorry. no, no. : i... um...the only thing that i can think of, is that i question more than other people. that’s the only thing that i can think of. um, and i know that i question more than other people just based upon meetings and interactions. i know that i question more than my colleagues. most of my colleagues, obviously not all of them. but i don’t know, i guess, i don’t know why they don't do it. : yeah. : i guess, yeah, i guess.  : possibly a difference in obsession. : yeah, in that the people who think like i do, who take to the iterations, they do tend to be as passionate about it as i am, so yeah. possibly, so, yeah.  : yeah, exactly. just the desire to know. i don’t know if you want to call it passion, i don't know if you want to call it obsession, it's just\ : yeah, yeah.  : i would definitely be more focused. i'm not as neurotic as some people, but i mean my husband is insane.  : he is - when he is interested in something you cannot pull him away but if he doesn’t have an interest he's everywhere. i'm a little more, like i said, i know me, yes, i can be very, very focused but i also know that, i also know where my limits are and when i hit my limits i have to pull away.  : yeah, yeah, yes. -laughs- : if it's something that i'm interested in, i retain it. if i have no interest in it, it's gone (snaps) in three seconds.  : if i don’t care about it, then yes. if i care about it, no. : i mean, yeah. that makes sense. i can understand the thought process behind it, yeah.  : you're asking which one i'm more associated with? : i'm a very - again it comes from questioning. i'm a very big fan of questioning tradition. so, um, in that aspect i can say that going against - removing inhibition is important to me in that, you know, "why is this taboo?" and if there's a rational reason why it's taboo, i'm okay with it. if there's not a rational reason why it's taboo, then i tend to be very "screw you" you know i - reverse psychology really, really works on me, to say it. : i don’t know, to me i think they go hand in hand. the way that i approach it, it goes hand in hand. inhibiting convention is - i could - that would be the same type of thing. it's questioning "why are we supposed to do this?" "why aren't we supposed to dance on the table naked?" "why are we not supposed to walk around barefoot?" and if the reason is rational and for health or for something i tend - actually that’s not true. um, if it doesn’t hurt me, i'm not going to follow the convention and if it doesn’t hurt – if it doesn't significantly hurt other people that i care about, i'm not going to follow the convention. but it's not that i am uninhibited or inhibited. i want to understand why we are supposed to do this or not do this. : yeah, yeah. i mean i did say that, but yes. i will definitely do things just to prove a point that it's stupid.  : yeah. : yeah : yeah, yeah. : you mean needing to do something because it's been done before? : i hate that.  : i'm so against - to me, compulsion means this is want somebody told you to do it and you're going to do it. are we defining it the same way or no? : -laughs- so, what definition of compulsion – of compulsive are you thinking of? : no : no, you mean like ocd? : i don’t really think i\  : okay. sorry! -laughs- : you mean like having to play with my necklace just because? : ...i would never do something against my conscious - i work very, very hard to not do something against my conscious wishes. i mean like in terms of eating and sleeping, yes, i'm a big fan of. i have nervous ticks, but they don't make me feel better. : i don’t think about them, but if they are brought to my attention, i work very hard and i have no problem with not doing something.  : no, but i think i might be borderline autistic. : -laughs- or i think i might have autistic tendencies. : when, um... when i am focused on trying to find an answer, i tend to stop caring about people's feelings. i tend to not - i can be well this is right, this is what all the data says so i don’t care that you're crying. it's like you're wrong. at least, yeah, um. human emotion is less important to me than understanding why. i don’t know if you, i don’t know if it's - like i said it's my favorite word in any language. and yeah, i tend - human emotion sometimes baffles me. : exactly. but i've been told my several people that my response to human emotion is not always normal. : i pace myself more : yeah.  : i hate to say this, but my migraines dictate a lot and i have figured out... if i didn’t have migraines i would be more productive.  : yeah, i would definitely - i think that based upon the reading i have done and as bad as my migraines are, i probably do manage them better than a lot of people and again, i don't listen to convention in that all of the physicians tell me that- i take medication for it - i should only be taking about nine a month. there are - i average about twenty a month. so, i don’t listen to convention i want to do this so screw you, i’m going to do this. and if i die in the process, i'm okay with it!. so, um, yeah. : yeah, yeah, unfortunately, i'm a little... jaded. you know, when i first started it was "we're going to kick cancer", "i'm going to make lasting contributions". and now, and again, i'm exhausted, so that’s one of the reasons. : yeah, exactly. but it’s definitely, you know, "why the hell am i doing this?" i've been doing this for fifteen years and i haven't once made a discovery that actually has even translated into patients. why am i making myself physically ill and ruining my marriage, you know, when i could just flip fries for a living, so, yeah. i've gotten a little jaded whether or not that’s because of time or whether or not that's because of where i am right now.  : i think it’s a little bit of both. i think that even if i were not in a frustrated time it would, again, it would be more about pacing. it would be i'm really excited about this answer but i have to take care of myself and i know that my research will still be there, even if i weren't in my frustrated phase. so, it's definitely gotten more realistic, yeah. : oh, god, i'm scared now.  : um, i don't know. i feel like the questions that you've asked have gotten at it i just don’t know if i have been able to explain it well in that, um, how... how - i don’t know, i don’t really know what to say. i don’t know if it’s the passion that i have for the understanding, i mean i don’t know. i feel like you actually did touch on everything, but it's that overarching passion or curiosity or whatever word you want to give to it. obsession of understanding what it is that i'm trying to understand. cause the people who have, because i've known a lot, granted i'm only a post doc - i'm finishing up applying for pi positions, now, essentially. and i've seen a lot of people that have not made it as far as i have and who have not been able to stay with it and it's because they don’t have an innate drive or passion to ask questions. i don’t know what question you would've asked, but that’s\ : \that's how i see it, yeah. : it's needed for most people. the people who - i know realistically, i know what my chances are of finding a tenure track position is that they're probably a little below average and the people that are on the high end of "oh they're definitely going to get it", they are ten times more obsessive than i am. they don’t have social relationships - they do, but they don’t have - polo pulls me away a lot. but the people who are on the high end of, "oh yeah they're definitely getting a tenure track position, they're definitely going to go farther than i am", they are so much more obsessive about it than i am and the people, like i said, who have fallen off the radar, it's because they didn’t have that passion and that driving curiosity.  : i would have to say developing the ability to adapt.  : any type of skill set that i've developed, there's always been an appl- the hole in ten was develop the skill set to create solutions and you're given what the potential challenges would be and the - you get into the real world and you realize that "oh my goodness, no one ever told me about this! it's not a, it's not b, it's not c, what the hell is h?" you know? so you have that moment, so it's redefining the term sort of application, redefining the idea of wisdom and being able that - someone who really has whatever their skillset is, what i found the artform is that on a dime, they could completely use all of their skillset – turn it upside down, right-side up, inside out – and because the situation they're in was never before then even imagined, and still be cool and calm and say here's the solution. or here's a menu of opportunities that could be a solution. and i just go, wow. it's like meeting someone say, "what do you do," and you have four seconds and if you don't get it in four, there's a bomb that's going to go off, this buildings going to go. god this is crazy. so it's sort of like your ability to communicate what it is you can do in a succinct manner uh, with deadlines and beeping lights all around. that is someone who really has their act together and i've met someone and start going into it i was just on a flight to new york and i asked this guy, so "what are you up to?" and he started telling me that he is a reseller of jet parts. and he starts going into this detail of this and four seconds in you're like i hope he's not going to go into... it's like you meet someone and say "so how are you?", you've never met them before and they tell you, "you know it's interesting you asked. yesterday my son or my daughter and then my car..." oh my goodness they're telling me their life story. i just wanted a "yes or no its going great." in like three seconds i'm going to be on the seventh floor and then they're like, "but wait." so, it's that ability to provide an answer in the allotted time and making it as an application and it's not just uh, you know, my dog passed away so i want to let everyone know my grief. now, you're not even that interested. in fact, you hate dogs. that's when no application and you have your own family issues or personal issues so you don't really wanna hear someone else's trip right now. it's just not a good time. maybe a month ago or two days ago, but not right now. so, it's having that ability to be perceptive to a situation. so you're not only the director, but you're the actor. and if you can't be both, you cannot create change. and sort of implement whatever procedures which may be or completely not in the manuals. they're never before seen and to be in situations uh... i've been around some very skillful people and that's sort of been the highlight of people who have been like, you know from the distance from earth, the mars would be my level set to theirs and to see them be able to do this. and i've seen it like in an operating room with uh, someone whose a pediatric neurosurgeon and the mri show this and that and be able to go in there, open up, and say oh my goodness this is not... things have changed since we took that ten minutes ago and now we're looking at a completely different - and this patient will die if we don't do something radical right now. i don't even have the opportunity to explain this to his parents. so, it sort of can be life threatening - i worked on [job 1] for ten years so i saw companies on the verge of, i worked in [department], so i saw companies where people – the market is going to open in eight minutes and we saw what just happened in the asian markets and when that news hits, things are going to go to hell in a handbag, so i need to know right now, you know, what your objectives are and we need to know and we have like three minutes. and so it's to see people be able to make these and it could affect 152,000 employees in eighty two countries, so being able to make those types of decisions under that kind of environment. some people could do it. some people couldn't do it. i saw people literally have emotional breakdowns. have their whole sort of emotional structure – their wife/girlfriend left them because they couldn't deal with the, you know - this going down all the time and to be able to keep moving and that's why i think being able to adapt is just a challenge as we move through life because we all look to obtain a certain skillset and we have ways to equate. i just got a 4.0... wow. i did well on the final exam and i have all of these degrees, wow that's amazing. and i for, you know six years, wow, that's incredible. and, you know, you're looking at your work record and all of that. that's all fantastic, but how does it deal with coming up with a solution right now? i need to get back to you on that. and then being with also some senior executives and when you got into, so what's the road map out of this? to see that, they had a team of people and it wasn't really them creating these – what i call these wow solutions – it was really their team, so i found out that i really didn’t - i thought i wanted to talk to the ceo, but the real person i wanted to talk to is sort of... you know he has fifteen support senior execs, who of these fifteen people was really coming up with this and did it consistently over a period of time? and then you say you meet that person and they're just diagnosed with cancer. so, our lives changed, and so are we currently able to do this and do it instantaneously or he was in a car accident or you know all of these life elements we have no control of. i just walked across a street and this lady ran over my left foot and i'm in such pain that it's overriding everything, i just couldn't think about anything. so i started taking pain medication and now i have a dependency issue and, wow, you know i honestly... so you find people who are shells of what they were or what you heard of and i think of conrad's heart of darkness that you go up this river and you want to see, it's like apocalypse now, and you hear about this amazing, you see all this rec – oh my goodness i get to meet this person.  they've written books and won international awards and all that and you get to see, you know, well where are they now? that was a year ago. that was five, ten years ago. what can they do right now? so, it's sort of like we live in a now culture and whatever you're doing is all about right now and your past - i look at prospectus on investments - past performance is no indication of future success and they always have that. why are you wasting my time then? because i want present and future and you're telling me that has nothing to do with it? no, it's just a legal disclaimer. i don't want you to hold me accountable. so, it gets into responsibility because i'm now turning over, you know, my investment portfolio, my company's portfolio. i'm now vesting my health with you because i heard you were the top brain surgeon. you know. i didn’t realize that your license had been suspended due to the amount of medical malpractice claims, you know. i didn't know that. i would have never selected you as my doctor, you know. because i just found out that i have two inoperable brain tumors. so, we're all in these like incredible situations and we think that when we're in the situation, i'm the only person dealing with this. and then when we find out there are hundreds of thousands to millions of people around the globe... and that to me is the power of research because it pulls these people together who are combating similar situations and that again um, gets me back to your earlier questions of being able to adapt. that emotionally i can deal with that. i can deal with that. i continue my work. i'm afraid that if anyone finds out i'll be fired from my high prestige job because when they find out that i'm, you know, sixty per cent lower in capacity, they're going to flip. they're going to fire me. so, all of these elements come into play to make decisions that are going to impact the next thirty seconds of my life. the next week. tomorrow, i have a review with my boss. you know, all of these different elements and everyone has -  our society as creating these guidelines to a set performance. because no matter what you're up to, what your sector is, and i find that amazing because sometimes that has very little true sense of evaluation. it could be incredibly accurate or it could have absolutely none whatsoever. because why do these people end up - i went to law school so i had some friends that worked with the scc and they go after these really high profile, you know, titans of the universe. guys making billions of dollars. there's a gentleman whose one of the top, the top hedge fund managers. and he went and took down the senior executive at [consulting firm], which is a top consulting firm, and two seniors at some of the top fortune 500 companies of the world and they were doing insider trading and that's why he was so successful. and he would get the annual or the corollary results before they were released to the public and then go trade on that and making billions of dollars net tax every year. you know, just mind boggling. well, it was all fraud. so, it's sort of like seeing this made off situation that was on television recently. so, how much of someone's performance is, you know, like armstrong and bicycling like oh and by the way i've been doping my whole life and if you, you know, claim that i have been i'm going to sue you because i make gazillions and millions every year. i could make your life... i could turn it upside down with our lawyers. and, that basically was like fifteen or twenty years so lance armstrong was a fraud. wow. seven time medal tour de france winner, fraud. : hm... i guess it was sort of a progression of stages. when - it's sort of like when i was younger, you're rewarded and everyone acknowledges success. you just got an a on your report card. that's fantastic. we're going to take you out and get ice cream. wow. in fact, you can get two scoops instead of one. fantastic. i'm excited. so there's that reward, you know the pavlov dog situation, and then to get in that environment as you get older, our society really honors, just goes nutsoid over success. then to be in situations that - it was going - i used to always have this question of is my reality greater than my dream? and as i got older, i soon realized that you have this dream, and how much of it is realistic? and where did that - the fibers of this material come from? i love the look of this fabric. i didn't realize, because i don’t like the color purple, this has a lot of purple thread in it. i didn’t know that. so it's like as you get examining, now you're looking under a microscope what this looks like. so it's sort of like taking - this is where i am, and then you fade out and it's like the satellite view of where i'm at. so i go, wow i had no idea that's where i'm at in the western hemisphere. i thought i was a big deal. ron burgundy. who am i? i'm sort of a big deal. and it's very easy when you are ringing all the bells of success in your mind to think, "i am a big deal in my sector". and some people take that externally, emotionally, and you meet and you go, oh my goodness, this person's ego. and i've met both men and women, you know this building structure is not big enough to contain it. you have no idea who i am type of thing. and i used to run into that extensively in a lot of areas that have worked and so, it's getting to - the point of that story is that as i had success, under the system, then you get out of the system, let's say school, graduate school or whatever. and now, you're just on your own. and there aren't those quantitative ways to say, "you got an a". and this course is sixteen weeks and at the end you'll have an exam and you'll get a grade. in life, it's not like that. there's no consequential structure that - so you can have deals pending for months and years and people are going how is that? why are you spending so much time on that? and i say, "because i think we can pull this all together." we spend over three million dollars. it's like digging a hole and hoping that we're going to hit oil. and if you don't, in the meantime, you're just bringing resources and money. and because of that, we're going to have to make cutbacks. because of your decision to go and dig that hole, and the money we spend, we're going to have to lay off twenty per cent of the workforce because you have not hit gold or oil. okay. so, back to your earlier question, when i started pursuing different projects and i did have success, i was amazed before people would rush and go, oh that's great that's wonderful, and i was surprised how many within the corporation, within in the public, were not rushing to embrace the success. and, i played [sport 1] and i was in italy playing at the [tournament 1] one year and i was playing an italian and this guy was a number two ranked italian player and there are twenty-five thousand italians and i was like three hundred in the world and all of a sudden, it looked like i might have a shot at taking this guy and he started getting sick because it was like one hundred and five degrees out. and i said, oh my goodness, this guy is cramping out, and if he does, no matter what, he is levels, hundreds of places above me in skillset. i could take this guy down. and when that perception became reality, the crowd went ballistic and they started throwing coins and screaming and i do like make, you know i did a double fall, which is like, i don’t know if you know anything about [sport 1], but it's like beating yourself. huge, huge cheers. oh my goodness, that's fantastic. so to have twenty-five thousand people rooting against you, that can shake - that first time, when i win, they root for the winner, and all of a sudden i'm going to take an italian out in [city 1, country 1]... you are bad. you are evil. and i've never been put in the role of the villain and that i found interesting and then later to be in banking as you're moving up and now, your seat, you've got a better parking space than i do. basically, i want your job, but i don't want you to know that. and i'm maneuvering around to take you out. and i'm also - i've talked to some other firms and i think you'd be perfect to work at those other firms. and i'm telling senior management that i think you need to go. and you don't know all of that because we work together. in fact, you're my boss. so it's like, all of these internal dynamics. : oh yeah. so i want to, you know i had a situation on a deal where a client was looking to buy five per cent of [company 1], and the - which was an initial huge stake, and this was when [company 1] was like a top, top company and when it first started out. and it was an asian gentleman and we had a team of like fifty investment bankers and lawyers on either side of this huge desk and it ended up that the bank that i working at was getting very caustic because they weren't getting what they wanted and they thought that the asian buyer would fold, and this guy was not going to fold at all. so, we're going to the elevator, let's take a break now, because it's starting to get a little name calling and all of that, and a senior partner says, "let's take a break." we go out to the elevators and the asian guy comes over and we started talking, and we're not supposed to talk to the opposition, and so i didn't know what to do. so, he started saying and we started talking and this and that and he says, "so what do you think?" and i'm like a newbie on this thing. i know very little. but i looked at it like a [sport 1] match. either way, both parties could win here. it's not, you win, i lose. and i said - i told him what i thought and i told him that i think the lead on my team is getting emotional and i don’t think that's positive to coming up with a constructive solution and he said, "exactly." and he goes, "and here's what i want." and so he walks back in and he says i want to talk with him and he pointed at me and this other guy and he didn't want the senior guy there. and oh my goodness it blew that guys mind. : yeah, the boss man who was like levels above. like he's got forty years of experience type of thing and i've been there for two years type of thing. and he said, now i don't want that guy in the room and he's pointing to the senior partner and i'm thinking, oh my goodness, i'm going to get fired. that's the first thing, forget about this deal. i'm going to get fired. i didn't think it would go there. so they had to make phone calls and all that and they finally in like three and a half hours, i worked a deal out. and it turned out then that this asian guy ended up hiring me to go work for –inaudible 22:10 – so i work for his family and all of that but it was like ego. and, the inability to adapt and again, the most difficult element is that we walk in - and i'm quite proud of my skillset, in fact i was third in my class. did i show you my degrees? they're up on the wall. you know, all these types of things. there's sort of accoutrement of my hard work and i want you to know that because if you do, you may hire my firm, and that's very important. that's very important for you, more important more me, and all these types of things. you want people to like, you want people to be impressed with you, both professionally and personally and what i found out is, is that it's really quite meaningless. you have to put all of that aside and act like you have nothing in order that you can get something. so that was the biggest - i saw, you know, i think there's a scripture verse that says "pride commeth before the fall". i saw a lot of people falling and a lot of business dropping through the cracks because they were more important than the deal. : important in what i do? is that the question? : i was in banking. i left it and now i just do, you know three or four, projects a year. which is great. : oh, it's still in my area of expertise of [department 1]... so it's still, but it's working with a team i assemble. it's working when i want to. with all that benefit was this idea that all we need you to do is work a hundred hours a week.  : wait, are you kidding me? and then, you know, i work with members of our team who started battling depression. several members who extremely, cover a fortune magazine for the top under thirty, committed suicide. how is that possible? okay. everything in the world you can imagine by the time you're twenty-eight, okay. because they're under so much stress and they realize there is nothing more to this game than just continuing to do it and that's sort of the mind boggler of what is it that you want out of this relationship? and i got to that point really quick. it's like a personal relationship or this relationship, i define a relationship anything you share time with. and it was like, oh my goodness i never asked myself that because i saw these accoutrements. i mean, i'd like to own the glasses that you wear. i'd like to drive the type of car that you drive. i saw your house, your apartment, oh my goodness. maybe fifteen years from now i could have a place... i could inhabit your lifestyle. that would be great. and then, is it just about the materialism? is there... it's certainly more than that right? it's more than just the money right? it's sort of like a jerry mcguire type of thing. you know he writes his manifesto and everyone goes i'll give that guy two more weeks at best. you know, he's having a meltdown. you start questioning everything because it's the intent behind the act. why are you doing what you do? and i find that in this progression of education, oh you need more education... oh okay undergrad means nothing today. it's like buying coffee. you can't live on just coffee alone, you need an entrée. you need a dessert, you need a well-balanced... you need to go to graduate school. you know, you just have one degree? wow, i have three degrees. you know people are going, wow, you have a phd, you've been to this, you've been to law school, you know, wow that's amazing. so, whatever, what are you going to do with it? and that's like when the rubber hits the road. so, it's sort of like every step that of the way as you move up, if i could just get this, i'm going to be... oh my goodness, that's all i need. and then you get there, and you realize, wow. i mean it's... it was great yesterday. but that was yesterday. and then you get in this environment where it gets back to my earlier statement... it's all about now. and what have you done for the firm, for us, for today? so back to your earlier question... it's like it's more of this relationship that i can spend with someone that you meet, you have a connection, and you say, i could really enjoy seeing that person once a week. and it would be a blast, but i would not want that person as my roommate, they would just drive me nuts, okay. so you get into those types of things. how much time are you spending with this person? and do you have this sort of increasing interest curve, because if i spent like a half hour with this person, that would be a dream, once a month. and i have people in my life like that. friends. and we talk and i've also found that a lot of people, what they do, like they're in medicine or they're in banking or they're in law or entertainment, that's a hundred percent of the ram going through the processing here. and everything is about that. and i realized i would never want to become that person. because i sell airplane parts, and i'll tell you what you really need. we got a special this week. and you're like, what in the world, were not buying airplane parts, i don't care. so, it's about having the time to be able to step back from the process and say, "how could my life be different?" and that's a very tough decision because when you start getting commitments and you have these dreams, these objectives, you got into this for a reason, and then to totally question that and to say, "you know what? i'm going to step away from all of this." and people are going, "are you nuts? are you crazy?" i'll tell you, i've got someone you can see. get on some medication, you'll be fine in a week. we need you back here on monday, okay? have a good weekend. you know, this type of thing. i was telling people for like two years, i'm leaving. and they were like, yeah right, you're not leaving. and i was like, yeah. i'm out of here. because i... i need more than - everyone's working like for the prestige and the money, but it's really for the money aspect and once i got the money, then it was like that saying, how many... you know in the movie wall street, "how many boats can you ride behind?" i only need one. maybe you think you need fifteen, i only need one. in fact, i don't even need a boat, i'll walk type of thing. it's getting back to that core issue of what is the relationship? what are you putting into it? what are you getting out of it? and we're human beings, so we change. and what i found out is, i had a dream and a dream that i thought might take me my entire career, i was able to achieve in ten years. and, i walked away with no mental or nervous disorders and no drug dependencies and all that. and i saw a lot of people self-medicating: alcohol, cocaine, all sorts of things. because they're under such major pressure, you know. and i quickly understood why people's sense of judgement, integrity, what's legal or not legal, could become impaired. and it's like when i see general motors had this starter and it turned out that this starter they figured would be $4.50 to replace, and they said let it ride. and now there have been one hundred and twenty-eight deaths and the new first ever female uh, ceo and chairman at gm that was one of the engineers that signed off on that, said no let's not replace it, okay. and now she's the chairman of the whole shebang. and guess what, eight years ago she was the person who signed off on it and said, don't worry about it. we'll have a few deaths, maybe one or two. it's been one hundred and twenty plus people. so, someone is making impaired decisions in high places that can impact millions of people. you had an earlier question of you know sort of like what are you getting ever - something about impacting others or... : oh, why is it important, you know that's a fascinating... because that issue, it was important. that's why i began this relationship. and once i had it, i no longer really needed it anymore. and i also realized - and i hate to compare business to personal - but it's like you have a perception of somebody and then as you spend time with them, that perception will change because you're finding out more about them. and that may increase that upward sloping interest curve or it may come tumbling down. i didn't know that he's a cocaine addict. he's tripped out on heroine, but he's incredibly successful, you know. i can't believe he can do what he does with those dependencies. you find out all sorts of things. you find out someone's past and from that past you go, "i admire you even more now. understanding that both your parents were in prison and you were able to get a college education," so then all this stuff, and you i know what, i had this opportunity for just over ten years to learn about everything, to learn from some of the top, and i go i got it! ok. it's like i took my photograph, it's a great memory. i'll always have it. i have these people that i can call who are resources whenever i want to. and, that it is meaningful for me to be able to do what i once did that is personally that i can help others to –inaudible 33:36 - at wall street, the business model is fraud which is an amazing statement to say a whole sector's business model is fraud. that's great, you know. it's like, you know, we got hilary clinton jumping in on the pharmaceutical business, you know are drugs bad? are they evil for what they charge? billions of dollars in development. all those issues come into play when you have business trying to provide a service and i think that people are able to implement a change in their own life. like i was. i feel lucky to have gotten out. i feel incredibly lucky that i had the financial resources to leave and i'm not an addict and i'm not - uh, my -it gets down to sort of how you perceive yourself. i can't... you're asking me to leave. i cannot do that because this is who i am and it's sort of like, is there a difference between who you are and what you do and i found that with a lot of, especially in the male mentality, there is no difference because i sell auto parts, i sell airplane parts, and so that becomes - there's like a fusion. like a bone graft and you can't separate those and that's why these people get stuck in the system and cannot implement change and i feel lucky that my identity was not, did i get a blast when i was in the early stages of my notoriety of my firm or sector, absolutely. was i proud? absolutely. was i rewarded financially? mind boggling so, okay. but, i always knew that there had to be more in my life to provide what i want and it wasn't tied to money.  : oh, absolutely. : okay, i'll talk - i'll just make a short statement that i've been amazed that every area of interest i've had, a sector that i pursued, and many uh, sectors that i've gone after that i have substantial amount of interest, i quickly became a massive failure in because i didn't have any experience - i really didn't know - but i really enjoyed it. okay. and that's humbling, but you know, in many cases incredibly embarrassing. but, i loved it so much, it's like, again being in an relationship that has no future, but you just enjoy that person for that time. okay. and as i got in, the first thing that hit me was, oh my goodness, i thought i knew a lot and i don't know anything. and i certainly don't know what it would take to activate whatever this vision is. i meet someone, back to your question, that's been doing what i aspire to and they... "so what are you up to?" and i say this that and they said, "okay." and in like four minutes - and i've been working on this for like five years - in four minutes they say... they summarize like my entire life in like four minutes.  it's like, oh my goodness. like he has - he or she has seen like twenty million people like me have the same visual image, we'll call that the objective, and let's say it's on top of this hill, and have seen all of these people trying to get up to the top of the mountain and they say, "well you're doing this and that." how do they know that? i haven't even shared anything that... and they know... you know why? because they've done it before and they've seen it for like twenty years. so it's like that ability to summarize massive amounts of information. in reality, the good and the bad, and then to say, "and here's where, after speaking with you for ninety seconds, here's where i feel that you are." and when they tell me that, what a load of crock. they have no idea where i'm at. there's no way. and then they tell me and i'm like, oh my goodness, that's exactly where i'm at. and it hits you like to your core and then, in that moment, you realize it's literally like uh, saying all we want you to do is walk in front of all of these famous people and take all of your clothes off and we're going to expose everything. oh my goodness that is so embarrassing i would never do that. and they look right through everything you presented and before they even speak and they go is there anything else? and i said, "well, no not really. that's everything." and you're going to be impressed with this - and they go, this is a load of crock, this will cost you about fifteen million for a one million dollar return. it's like they go bing, bing, bing, bing and all my beautiful deck of cards is like vaporized and now they've put it in the shredder and now it's in the garbage can. and they say, "and is there anything else? because i need to be going here." and i realized that everything i've been working - the sum total, the evaluation - is zero after zero and you can add more zeroes. it's worthless. and i go, wow. so, meeting about a number of people who were - i'll say the very first person that i met, was a writer named [author 1 - inspired participant], i don't know if you've ever heard of him. : you should check him out. he wrote a book called [author 1's book] and it was a new york times bestseller and [author 1] was an american gi, moved to paris after the war, and wrote and created the paris review, which is still in existence, which is a periodical that profiles new fictional writers. so he became like the illuminati of literature in new york and he passed away within the last like eight or ten years. met him through a friend. a guy who is a journalist who i got to know and he said you should meet [author 1] and they made a movie [author 1 book] as well and it was about a kid, he loved football, and he got a tryout with the [football team 1] and he tells you, [movie character 1], who played himself in this movie of this best-selling book, of what it's like. you think you can play football? oh sure, if i had the chance you'd pay be five, ten, fifty million, oh yeah, i could do that. everyone thinks that. i could do your job. whether you're in research, whether you're a professional baseball player, especially guys, oh i just never had the chance, but i got the skills. so, what he does is that he takes the leader into the shoes of trying out with the [football team 1].  : okay. so, it's a behind the scenes of what it's like to have a dream job and he then fought [boxer 1] in boxing. so he does all these things you've always wanted if you're a sports nut, if you're into sports. that was his gig. so i meet him and get an opportunity to get to know his family, which is another story, and he... at that time my dream was to be a writer. wow. you know, finance, screw that. legal, that's boring. i want to be a writer, and after talking for an hour and a half, he said, "listen [pt name], i'm going to save you some time, no one is going to ever hire you for what you want to do." and i said, "but i think i'll be talented and i think..." "no one is going to hire you, write it down please. no one is going to..." i'm writing it down you know and he goes, "so you need to hire yourself to go after the vision and your dream." changed my life. i walked away and i said oh my goodness. first of all i'm going to be an incredible failure because no one is going to give you the luxury of trying to do what you want to do because you have no background. you have no resources. you basically have nothing more than a vision. and he said, "what you have, what could be different, was the skillset to take that vision and turn that into reality." and he said ,"you can't teach that." and he said, "i think you have the drive and the initiative to make that happen and only your life will be able to be the report card on whether that can happen." but what it did was save me a massive amount of time because he said you could spend ten years of your life pitching people and trying to raise investment financing to do something in your dream and all that. i'm telling you, don't waste your time. go in and get into an area where your skillset could have high impact, high return, and then go do things you want to do. and that was a roadmap for my life. so, and i met people on the way who were trying... who had their unbelievable dream and had tried to just go out and do it, and you're asking sixteen/seventeen year-olds, could you give me a chance to do this. and of course they're going to say no. they're going to go and get the former senior vice president of apple who designed the iphone to do that new item that you want to design. why you? in fact, i need to go. i don't have time. time is urgent and you're not... there's no pay off to talking to you anymore. so it's like people churn and burn and i found that really amazing, um, so that changed my life and i got to know [inspiring person 1] who is the founder of the [inspiring person 1's group] and that was both an incredibly interesting experience in a positive way and also a saturday night live side of it, of he is saying all the research and all of that, screw it. just go do it. get some money. i don't care if you have to max out your credit cards and do it. you want to do it, only you know that you can do it. it's like an infomercial pitch, okay. that's what he sells. in reality, he is, he is a high school dropout, no formal education whatsoever. in reality, he is a number maven, and he is crunching those numbers and if those numbers don't add up, our conversation is over. and i think that is so funny because everyone wants to hear, "you got a dream, go do it today. quit your job tomorrow." well, how am i going to pay my mortgage, my rent whatever? you're probably going to wonder. you'll be in bankruptcy in two to three years. you're credit cards will be maxed out. the competition you're going to rise up, whatever your business attempt is, will going to be so massive you won't be able to get out of that hole. you'll end up massively in debt. and you might meet some interesting people, but there's probably a 99.8% chance you'll be a failure, and you left a very good job and benefits and now you have no health care. so like, he's saying one thing, but internally he's built a whole group, the [inspiring person 1's group], of companies, doing something completely different, so it's sort of like your message, what is the public persona, what is the private persona. and the private could be your private business pursuits. and the private, how do you run your life. so that was very fascinating for me to see. it was very exciting to get to know him, to see his mental process, and it was a real let down to see that in a way he's a bit of a fraud. he's had new york times best sellers pitching this go out and do it... : um... : i would say the projects that i've done have been internally generated and internally in my mind. um, i definitely frequently would not be doing someone else's idea because the time to develop it and development, no matter what there is, there is no money, so you're just burning time and money. i would never go through with that and start that relationship. i would have to have the sense that, you know, i call it the romantic stage. there's got to be that emotional connection for me to invest that kind of time, knowing that i could go do similar projects that i could not stand. i couldn't care less, but yet i'm being paid a lot of money every day. every day, every moment i'm working on that and all of my expenses are covered. fly all over the world, meet with all of these people - all the legal top accounting firms and all that - it's all paid for. so, is this thing blows up and it easily could - it's still - i walk away highly paid. i didn't get my percentage commission on the outtake, but i made a lot of money and i'm in no debt. i met some interesting people that i'm going to network on other projects, okay, so that's one scenario, or you can do what you want to do, so in essence one of my criteria is that i'm in love with it and i like it so much that - and this is an incredible problem for me is that you like your dream so much that i do a lot of things and i say i'd be doing this if there was no money in it. woah. that is drugs and alcohol. don't ever say that again. no i do, i love it so much i'd do it without getting paid. because i'm getting off on that. i just get a pay off. i love this subject matter. i love the people involved. i haven't been able to coin the term "monetize it" yet, okay. i don't know how we're going to make money on it, okay, but i just love doing it, okay. you're talking now twitter, you're talking, you know things like that. twitter doesn't know how they're going to monetize. : absolutely. : i would have to say it's a combo platter of having both literally and conceptually been around the world. i just uh... : it would be life experience and seeing... we go into a department store and you say you have a half hour and you want to go and we're just going to be looking at women's clothes, okay? i don't wear women's clothes, but i'll go with you for the experience because we're friends. and in there, i see a lot of both materials and colors schemes and what not, so my - everyone says so what – you know people have asked me – so what is it that you do? what do you feel your strength it? and for a long time, i said, "you know i went to law school. i got an mba. i'm a finance, you know, i'm a numbers guy." but i found out none of that is what i do. what my strength is, and it's taken me years to figure this out, both through success and success is a real coverall because when you're successful you think that your skillset is responsible for that. but what i found out was is that i'm an associative person. so, this gets to the core of your question that i pick up like just crazy facts. i keep notebooks of things that i see throughout the day from what people are wearing. you know i walked in here, i'm walking up the sidewalk, and i saw this woman with beautiful brown hair and the tips were like psychedelic uh purple and she was dressed in a business suit and i was like, wow, that is not something that i would configure. you know i didn't think it would be that sort of corporate with that color, but when it was pulled back, you could not see it. so, say at night you're a member of a punk band, but during the day you're corporate council for [university 1]. you know, it's sort of like one of those things. so, what the - where there's money is not inventing the wheel. it's reconfiguring the wheel. and so, to answer your question, a lot of it is, you know i'm looking at threads of the fabric. it's a lot of things that i enjoy. i hope that you representing women will enjoy it. i hope that men will also. well, what age demo are you talking here? fifteen to eighteen year-olds? nineteen to twenty-five year-olds will think that's a joke, so it's like to what degree does it have appeal? does it interest me? and, i've had situations that were reality that were so outside the range of believability that i have friends in entertainment - i have worked a little bit in the writing side of entertainment - and i'm going to tell you a story and they'd go, "that would never happen! you know, writers are very critical. they are going to shut it down." i say, "exactly. let me show you this file and i've got all the data, okay?" i just had a rocket ship land in my backyard. oh come on. and here it is. in fact, knock, knock, here is the guy whose flying it. a little guy, three and a half feet tall and you go, no way! and where are you from? mars. oh my... so unless you brought those elements to the table you'd say is this a comedy or something? i don't believe it. so when you bring in the data, the research, what i found is, is that support - that's part of coming up with a concept is can i support my vision with data – that's why i'm so into research of seeing the promises of research and how the data is aggregated, whose reading it, what does it mean, and in what way could i use that data to demonstrate that this destination that you've never been to, and by the way neither have i, that if someone were to go there, they'd go wow. i'm intrigued. i would like to go. and then we get into the issue of cost. would you pay fifty dollars? would you pay five thousand dollars? so, it's starting to trim it into a business. so, it's got to have the human connection, the personal connection – and i start internally. does it appeal to me? and there are a lot of things that i enjoy that i think, unfortunately, a lot of other people would not enjoy. that's depressing for me. that's like boohoohoohoo, you know. that's the little emoticon that says, "oh, that's sad". um, okay, i'm not going to pursue that. although i'd like to. and it might be a hobby. i might put a little bit of time into it, but if i need something that really turns me on, like the art world really turns me on in a huge way because it's a fusion of both art and big business and the people that are involved in the art world are a lot of billionaires are involved in that. and is it straight up business? i'm just, i'm doing a lot of research on a project and i got two leads, like incredible leads are telling me that forty plus percent of the art floating in the market is fraudulent. wow, you've got to be kidding me. that painting? no, it's fraud. and people are paying gazillions and millions, hundreds of millions of dollars. so, that whole concept that you can have this trillion-dollar business floating around throughout the world - that to me - and whose engaging in that? a lot of wealthy people who have resources and can get the data. wow, that's fascinating. and it gets down to taking speckles of paint and saying, could this be from the 1500's? so there's a way, like dna, to quantify those aspects to it. so, it's not a science, in answer to your question. it's more of - it's like an artform and one of the biggest aspects is timing. like, i've had ideas in my notebook and i tried to go out and i could just tell that there was no connection between the investors, the marketplace. but who was at the front saying oh yeah oh yeah? me. i was probably the only person. you know. it's like i'm the dork that's going "oh yeah, sure, great!" you know, it's like, you wore that? and then you see it. it's like you're looking through photos... i can't believe i wore that in high school. it's embarrassing. don't look at that one, you know. and that's what these projects look like. they have a personal connection for me like that and that's why you have like a directory of these and i just share them with myself and sometimes i'm fusing them together and that's exciting because i know that would never make it on it's own, so it needs a partner. it's like one direction, you know. the members of one direction have been in, you know, singing contests in london with simon cowell and none of them made it. they were eliminated. and after early he said, "why don't we put you together?" now one direction with justin beiber is one of the top pop groups in the world. okay? i could care less, but the process of getting, taking these desperate parts, putting them together, that fascinates me. : um, by nature, incredibly focused. i could go, um days just working on something and if i get lit up and it's happening, i will... i have the luxury in my life to literally put a lot of things on hold. and i also have this staff that i can say they could take over the things and i'm just going to go do this because it's happening right now. and that to me is like, you just found out, you know i compare to there's a sunken treasure off the coast of florida and there's a flight in twenty minutes, do you want to go? let's do it, because i just rented a submarine and we're going to go down and i've got some sonar pictures that say the wreck is there and there's ten million dollars in gold there, you know, and it's like we better get there before someone else does, so it's like a race. so, i'm very - i've met people who can come up with the ideas but they don't - hey have difficulty focusing to - because there's a lot of boring steps along the way to take it from concept into reality is not my problem. : on the projects, i retain everything. if even information that has - i would like to get rid of - i don't throw anything away. and i could remember on different projects the people and what not surprisingly well and especially people, i recall what they do because to turn that concept into reality, it's going to take human beings that have exceptional skillset and so i've worked with several thousand people who i think, not now but i've got something that if it ever were to come together, you'd be the first person i'd call and i think collect that all the time because i know the importance of human capital.  : that's a good question. um, i would say my accountants would say that, uh - there is a report card because i have a corporation and they would say, you know, how is this doing? like, we see the expenditures, where are we in terms of this becoming profitable or will it ever? or are you just doing this because you enjoy it so much? we need to know. it's like, you know, we've gone out, we've had a great time, is this relationship going anywhere? is this going to be a marriage or are you just a serial dater because we need to know because the clock is ticking type of thing. and that's - unfortunately i have people who manage me because it's... i can do that, but i'd rather... it's... i can expend more of my creative energy and just totally involve myself not having to worry about the outcome. and then have them say in two months, we're going to sit down – i have a board - and you're going to report to us and we're going to tell you whether or not you should continue that.   : and from right now where you're going, i'm going to tell you, it's not looking good. so you're going to have to really show some tremendous progress here. so it's like having a supervisor and i love that because i love criticism, whether it's constructive or not. it just – it lights me up to further examine and show my weaknesses, and if you're not ready for the weaknesses, you're not ready for the success, so that for me is very exciting. : excuse me. ( answers the phone).  : um, others less time on like different projects or others like other people who are trying to do the same thing that i'm doing? : hm... what's interesting is that at the concept stage, i met and i felt this way myself so i'm sensitive to it and i'm presenting it for the first time to you, i've been working over four years on this and you're going, "wow", and would it be more meaningful if i told you i had been working eight years on this? it doesn’t -  and the people you're talking to, they don't care if you've been working thirty seconds on this or thirty-nine thousand years. it doesn't matter. all that past history, it's like let me tell you about, we don't care. when i was very young i met this guy named [movie producer 1] and [movie producer 1] was the partner of [movie producer 2] and so they made [movie producer 1 and 2's movie], all the early [famous actor 1] movies, okay? and we were talking and [movie producer 1] said to me, and this was another one of those statements that change your life, he said, "creating something in hollywood, there is no passport or visa required." and i thought about that, because i'm saying and i did this, and he said save it. it doesn't matter what your idea... it's like he didn't care what my background was, okay?   : some, i've had - it's hard for me to be objective about my own - it's like this person i was just on this flight with sitting next to me was a recruiter and he said, "you know, i've never read a bad resume." it's like... i look great on paper, but did i tell you by the way i graduated -  every resume is great. it's supposed to make people look great, so in comparison to others, first of all, i don't think about that. : um, i've had people tell me that i process more information faster than anyone they've ever met and they said that's why you can do and jump sectors like you do.  : that would be their assessment because some people have said, you know, i just don't know how you get into a certain sector and do what you say you're going to do. but you've not only done it once, but you've done it multiple times. and i think that's because i'm an info nerd. i love facts and data and i don't really - there's some part of me i can get into it even if i'm not into the sector. i just love it all. i love the nitty gritty, the nuts and bolts of it all. and then once you sort of assimilate that, you could have meaningful conversations with people who have been doing it for thirty years and i'll give you an example of that. i had an idea for a product one time and i didn't know if it would be patentable and i had no idea of the use. so, i went and i created it. a friend of mine who won an academy award in animation said i want you to meet a friend of mine, and his friend uh, had a tv series called, [tv show 1]. so, i met this guy at this party and he said, "i saw your product and i'd like to use it for my tv series and put my different characters on it." and my product, it's like a rubik's cube and it unfolds and it changed from a square into a rectangle, and he starts - and i said, "what do you want to do with it?" so, he starts describing it. [tv show character 1], [tv show character 1] and he's talking about [tv show character 1]. and i said, "wow," i go, "you know, i've got another idea." "no, no, no. i just want to do this." i said, "hold it. i got something and could i do a mockup of my idea?" "no, i just want to use this because we're going to a [tv show 1] movie and we’ve never done a tv series that's animated for television and take it theatrical. it's never been done before the [tv show 1] movie. and we're going to go out to the theater owners and do this." ok so let me just do this one thing." you've never met me before and he's like, "no, no, no," and finally goes, "okay." so, i brought him... i had this... i saw this in a factory, something that was a moving part and i went and filed for a patent to change it up and i got the patent and what it was, was just any - it doesn’t matter what the 3-d casting around it is, but it moves and it moves symmetrically. so, what i did was i took the image of [tv show character 1] head from the neck up and split it in the head and a line here and it makes an incredible puzzle, okay? and i go back and he says, "oh my goodness that's wild!" so, he gave me the opportunity to make it. he owns the concept with [production company 1]. we went and did it and there were like twenty-five hundred of them and sent them out to all the theater owners. i made... i actually lost about five grand because it's not enough, but i did it and it's really cute and it sets up. so they have a toy license with a company called hasbro, who is one of the largest toy companies, they saw it and they said, "hey, do it and in fact we're going to do it." and i said, "well, we're going to have a discussion because i have a patent on the mechanism." "screw you we're going to do it." they started making it, they went to ship it in. i contact us customs, put a hold on that. sue them, freeze all the items, okay. and they said, oh my goodness this guy is serious and we cut a deal out. so now i manufacture it and every year, over all these years, you know, about we just went over the fifteen-million-unit mark, okay. when you talked about time earlier, i met [tv show producer 1], probably spent fourteen to fifteen minutes with him at that party, i went back to the demo, had it done with my team. probably spent ten minutes with him, okay. then went into production. within three months, i started shipping hundreds of thousands of units that i manufacture. [toy production company 1] distributes it and it's like an oil well. and the show has now been renewed and its not one of the longest standing shows on television. i had very little to do, but it - we sell millions of units. it’s like, and so my - in terms of time and benefit, and my accountants go, that's the business. you put almost nothing into it. you sell over millions and millions of it every year and you make a lot of money. what a great trade, okay. i put less time into that and will consistently make, generate, as long as it continues to sell and people love those characters. and you go on the internet and you'll see people doing, you know, their own theory on how to play around with it and it becomes sort of a cult type of thing. crazy. i had very little – you know it was just like an idea that i knew and someone, right place right time, bingo! it's like getting hit by a truck. i didn't even know the truck was there and my life was changed and now i can't walk right. i got hit. someone asked me to go into a party and i met some guy and he told me he created the [tv show 1]. but at first i was like, no way! but yeah, created the [tv show 1]. and so, i'm saying, you know, i'm very open minded. i've seen both. i've been on the receiving end of failure because i've done tons of stuff that i put everything i had and a lot of money that i didn't have, and lost it all. and i've had things like that where it's just a meeting, literally, and you know and it's a hit or miss. and you talk about investing time, i look at it that i better not be assessing, evaluating the process by the amount of time necessary because it could take a little or a lot and most projects, even if they're going to be successful, take more time and more resources and money. more gut-wrenching decisions to be made than you ever anticipated because you come up against these challenges because you've never been down this path before and the other is everything i'm into, i know very little about. so, i've got a tremendous learning curve and learning can be very expensive. especially if you don't... you know, i'm doing the brain surgery and i go, have you ever done this before? i never went to med school! i mean that's basically what it is like, and i don't want to injure anybody, but i might be injuring my wallet. so, i learn and learn and learn. and that, to me, that now i'm in a position that i can, i can make mistakes and i can learn from them. and they are costly, but no one else knows about it and from that mistake, i learn what not to do the next time and that's very exciting because i'm into learning and learning isn't always fun. especially when you're getting picked up and thrown down on the sidewalk and going, wow that really hurt. you know, i don't want to ever be doing that again. what's funny is that pavlov dog scenario. when you hit the pavement and that costs money, you learn quick.    : i would say i'd look at it in two ways. that, to take that idea and turn it into reality, the idea is very uninhibited. and then, as you... it's a pencil drawing and now you've colored in it as color. now you've done a 3-d model. now you're deciding the materials it's going to be made out of. and it doesn't have to be a product, because i haven't done many products. it's mostly conceptual. how two companies can work together. a concept for a tv show or something like that. so, it can be conceptual. but, where it becomes very... you lose the inhibition... is when you start talking to what i call "the factory". and "the factory" is the group of people you're going to need that are going to in some way monetize, manufacture, turn this wonderful coveted idea that you have that you love into a reality that hopefully others will love and it's also the litmus test of saying, "am i just so full of crap and full of myself in my idea?" and if you could take one step back, and a month or two... might take you a year... you're going to realize that this was the stupidest idea in the entire planet. and i have those discussions with myself going, you know, it's like looking at that photo again. i can't believe i was wearing that in high school. that's what it feels like. um, so, the people you have to bring aboard are very structured. and that could be anywhere from, you know, the accounting, assessing costs. budgeting. i like that, but do you realize that if we do that, that's going to increase the cost by like twenty per cent. it's like rehabbing a house. i know you want this beautiful kitchen, but just think about this. if we put that kitchen in, there hasn't been one condo or home that sold, with a kitchen of that type, that in any way you'll be able to recoup that money. so, knowing that you're spending it, you're going to lose it. because if you ever want to sell, you're definitely not. but what if i want to stay five years? no, definitely not. what if i keep it ten years... so you play all of these. what if i keep it twenty years in appreciation? no, by that time it will be outdated. either way, if we take your vision and we turn it into reality, we build this beautiful kitchen, you're going to lose. is that ok with you? i'm going to lose? i'm not into losing. it's my money? that's sort of scary. so, those are the types of, when you're talked about inhibition and sort of structure, you have to make those decisions. it's the idea that, you know, we're on a plane and they're four engines and one of the planes run out, so we've got to lighten the load. um, we're going to have to dump some luggage. is it okay if we toss your luggage? hell no! that's my luggage. why don't we dump you're luggage? no, no. how about that guy sleeping, let's dump his luggage. you know, this type of thinking. we've got to lighten up to go down that path. so, it's making some very tough decisions, um, from a creative it can be very, very gut wrenching. but i've done it so often that you become more clinical and that's where you develop the capability to, like i've seen so many creatives, "no, no, no. don't touch that, don't touch that. that's my idea and it's perfect." no, no, no. you know. they have no idea what they're doing. they've never been down that road. i can be very... i can be both the actor and the director saying what you did is not acceptable. you're going to have to completely change it. if that's not okay with you, we're going to have to get someone else to be this role. and i can be that role as both the player and the coach and i'm effective at doing that.  : i don't know if it's meaningful. : i'd love to figure that out. : ok. : oh ok.  : ok cool. : wow. i finished a master's degree. i was pretty happy with that. i got a master's in divinity. you want just one, that's probably my best one. kendra (1): and then so what do you attribute your success in finishing the masters?  :  i actually like academics it was sort of a, i, part of the reason that i answered the first question, the reason, first time cause i am from [city 1], so first time like totally out of family environment and all that stuff and there's like finding your own space and finding like where you belong kind of and but as far as finishing it, being able to study and memorize easily is a big help with academics, but also being able to come up with i would say narratives like when i in comparison of concepts and ideas which later becomes storytelling for me kind of, as i move more into the entertainment world so that's kind of how i made that, bridged that divide from theology bookish to making movies. yeah.kendra (2): and of all the obstacles you've encountered in life which was the hardest to overcome?: i would say personal, more like personal psychological identity stuff. that's really the major one and there's a lot tied into that. i was adopted so i was kind of like a host of things that come with that psychologically to work through, rejection and abandonment stuff and so that was yeah and so i spent a lot of time slogging through that with counselors and other fun stuff. no drugs just counselors but yeah. yeah. i think that's my answer.kendra (3): and so how other than seeing the counselors how did you have, how do you overcome that or work through it?: well, faith is huge. i am a big spirituality is probably the bed rock but it's also my way, my way forward, my way through things and i would say also the way i kind of translate the world. and for me it's not, even though i was an academic, spirituality for me is still, very much like the world of spirit heaven whatever you want to call at it as opposed to heady it's more kind of visceral it kind of brings the two together but it's the one, the two are not at odds in the way i approach it or look at it. but my understanding of like relationship with god, discerning the spiritual aspects of what's going on around me in current circumstances but also in looking at the future that's really the core hermeneutic from theology school, to how i interpret it i guess. kendra (4): ohh. can you tell me more about that?: kind of the lens that i am looking through.  : so your hermeneutic is the way, yeah the lens through which your looking and how you interpret something, i could spell it possibly -laughter- : it's h e r m e n e u t i c  : there's your two dollar word for the day.  kendra (5): thanks so has there been a particular project or event that has significantly influenced your career? : well\  : it's a career that is still in the making. oh gosh. i would say it's been more, actually i can answer that i feel like, i did, i directed like a drama group sketch comedy theater amateur theater, i'm a preacher's kid so out of my dad's church in [city 1] and i really think that's was the first thing that coalesced a lot of those creative strings that wouldn't quite fit in the box. and so getting to like write, direct and produce a show, amateur show when i'm like late teens, early twenties and just to pull it off and survive not that i came close, it set the precedent for me that i know i can have a sense of what i can do and so since then i have been able to do similar stuff but just is different media i guess whether it's live stage or film\ : photography, i play piano. yeah. kendra (6): and then are you focusing on the theater now or is still like a variety of different: it's still a variety of, priority focus is, well right now i'm just in ongoing classes because you never stop. i'm studying with an academy award golden globe person –laughter- nominee winner and who's pushing me even further with, actually what's interesting is that in los angeles for acting in particular, the training tends to be kind of watered down and what she's [university 1] trained and she brings more of the classical training into, somehow my academic journey went everywhere but there but i thrive in it. there's something in it, again it's the academic kind of brainiac side coming together with the creative that not everyone works that way but that seems sort of the way i kind of thrive in it even though sometimes i can get stuck in the brain part (laughter). the theory part. i love reading books about it but then actually doing it.kendra (7): ok and then how has your interest in your career develop over time or the way your thinking about it? : i do with that i kind of with that and i was touching on the spiritual side of things earlier a sense of, i don't want to sound like an egomaniac but a sense of destiny and that purpose and what your made for. i feel like that sort of emerged out of my, my graduate studies partly because like i said it was the first time really fully away from family environment of the people that have expectations, learning to like let it naturally come out of what how i am wired and so out of that i discovered just story, a love of story, storytelling which can incorporate you know everything. movies from everything to music to lighting and so i literally done pretty much every job on a movie set. i have done it. : including catering for the crew -laughs: sort of a jack of all trades kind of a thing. does that answer your question? : i love these kind of questions. kendra (9) : so what advice would you give to others starting out in your field. : it's all about who you learn from and go for the best like, get as high up the academic or whatever, whoever you can study with and go as high as you possibly can and spend every penny you can find to do it. as opposed to wasting time in kind of lesser, sounds really elitist but actually i really believe that. so much time wasted for me that could of been much more advantageous if i could have understood what i needed to do, what i could do and what was possible and it took me like years to get what i feel like i could of got much more quickly, so that's kind of my challenge especially for like actors who are sort of a disease in los angeles –laughs: but yeah that's my push ,study as high up the ladder and with the best of the best of the best and that would be my primary advice. yeah.  kendra (10): and would you advise specializing early or late?: maybe just by nature, specialization to me has sort of connect with compartmentalization. i mean know what you mean as far as being, i know they talk about the ten thousand hour mark for becoming specialized in something. so i played piano and i had done that just cause i started at six and my mom made me –laughter- she's a concert pianist and so specialization is wonderful but i wouldn't want to do it at the expense of you never stop learning, you never stop exploring, that curiosity. i feel like, and really the people that i worked with that are the best of the best there is that innate curiosity almost child like thing, excuse me, that seems consistent and i don't know if that answered your question? : not at the expense of constant growth and exploring it, it's areas of lesser strengths but they can be developed cause i feel like that's the primary thing as i keep breathing, just to keep learning, keep stretching, keep growing cause if you stop doing that you die sokendra (12): -laughs: ok so why is it important to get involved in your field?: well, at it's best i feel like we have the ability through stage, through film, through storytelling to provide for an audience perspective, talk about like fiction can give you a framework for living but also the point of identification outside of themselves that i think is very healthy just that kind of. have a sense of connection with humanity. but even more than that i feel like the ability and this wouldn't apply to all theater or all film by any means but the best of the best, the classics, the, whether their american classics or greek classics or whatever that there's something primal and even like elegant in it's way to lift, raise the bar, help people not see the world quite so small and expand what's possible, what's possible for me to contribute, just expanding possibilities like yeah the creative nest of story hopefully stimulating a creativity of some sort in whoever sees it, witness or it or whatever you want to say does that make sense? kendra (13): yeah and is that why you do it?: yeah well but the inspiration factor is really what i'm, if i pick one of the things that i was just talking about, inspiration for, to lift up, to inspire, kind of a sense of nobility, and that's also cause again for me having gone to like seminaries and so there is sort of a pastoral side of me.  : that drives that i guess. typical audience is my congregation, being in a theater or wherever, that's definitely part of what makes me tick. yeah just the drive to stories that can bring the aha moment or some kind of transformation etc. yeah. kendra (14): and so how did you initially become involved? so that i know you directed the amateur theater but how did you even get to there?: yeah oh well i was six years old, and they were casting a christmas carol and my mom kind of talked me into going and i actually, it's funny i didn't end up auditioning, i freaked out.  : total stage fright but something even just the prospect, that i got bit by the bug for performance period and then right after the introduction of internationally claimed boys choir, we toured all over the place, somehow i made the leap from singing to theater and everything else. kendra (15): did you end up being in the christmas carol even though you didn't try out?: no i didn't actually. -laughs-  : but seriously i was like ok i can do it but then i talked myself out of it. was having not like panic attacks but i freaked out well i was like six. kendra (15): mhm was it kind of like you got bit by the bug kind of because it was something that was a challenge for you and you wanted to kind of overcome that?: yeah i think so, i wanted to overcome it, like i felt the pull to do it but i'd never done it before at that point, now actually having actually done it  : -laughs- climbed the mountain. more than you know shepherd number three in the christmas player whatever. kendra (16): yeah. and then so this, the inspiration piece is that what kept you involved so long in your work. : you know, i'd say so. sorry i have my mouth full. kendra (16): oh no it's ok. have there been points in which you what you were doing you become less intensely involved or you felt differently about it, it wasn't as interesting or important to you?: well it's been kind of a, when you're really trying to do that for a career that's paying bills, and it's like the space of study study study to the point where you're not actually working you just use all you're like all you're doing is, you're forever preparing for the ball but never actually going.  : and there's been a bit of that seasons here are there, some of that is just the natural even flow of who understands you know seasons in a career and when your booking stuff and when you're not.  : but that's definitely been like frustration, borderline a little bit of just discouragement, depression kind of stuff will come as a result of that at some point, it's just like i just want to work.  : and i can find other creative outlets which helps and that limits the crazy, piano is helpful, yeah. how is that? : is that good –laughs- okay.  : yeah. : she yes.kendra (18): how has she stimulated your interests or influenced how you think about your work? : well specifically with acting she took, it was really a epiphany for me to see the level of just how much blood and sweat and work that goes into what she does, that she makes look so easy.  : which i think, i understood that in classical music and playing piano, and some other assets but for some reason acting was sort of this other thing. especially in la people of sort of like i'm pretty, put the camera on me you know it's like as opposed to the hard work and really craft and i feel like she really helped me get there from just an understanding of not only what the work is but how to work and then even more she's still, she's sixty-two or sixty-three and still taking classes and still going and still, that personal inspiration piece of it is just been huge really as well. kendra (19): and then when did you meet her, how did you get involved?: oh gosh, i met her like seven years ago and then started studying with her two and a half three years ago, she was in out of la and finally back.kendra (19):  and have there been any other significant people who have influenced you? : in creativity not people that i have, people that i may have been inspired of not that i have know and studied with, just sort of, i was an architecture student for a year and i had like six majors in college –both laugh- i was like all over the place, [architect 1] for example. huge inspiration, he's the only hero i have who was kind of an asshole but he was a genius, and so even like some of his buildings in [city 2] and [city 3], the one's i've gone in, just the kind of inspiration from experiencing the space that he has created has been actually really really important.  kendra (20):  oh wow. how does that inspire you, what is it about experiencing the space?: well it led me into all kinds of trouble at school cause i was just forever designing pictures of like buildings on napkins or whatever and not doing what i was supposed to be doing. i guess looking at if i take just him as an example then the way he was able to synergize kind of seemingly different pieces and bring them together and put something new. and then my experience of that space the effect on a visceral experience by walking through a building. which is you know a piece of art, you're walking through it that whole thing, kind of inspired me to want to do the same and figure out what, so i don't know how that translates exactly into storytelling there is an experiential element of it certainly. actually as i'm saying that my favorite movies are the one's that you sort of go for a ride, get in it and just i don't think about anything else and that's all too rare for me as a benchmark i guess would be something i would like to shoot for. yeah. okay i'll take that as an answer.kendra (22): oh i just wondered too like is it important for you to teach or mentor others? or have that kind of level of experience?: yeah, i mean i hardly think i am one who has arrived but i am like, let my ceiling be your floor for as much as possible is something i certainly. : and that kind of comes in like almost a pastoral capacity, cause i have a church i work with i pastor it.   : but very much so, to to give to others as i have received or even more so the things i had to fight tooth and nail and figure out to not have somebody else figure it out too –laughs- : it's like if i can annotate. that hopefully would be able to communicate that. yeah and i have actually part of just the school i study with my teacher i kind of do a little bit of that role with her and some of the younger students when they come in as well, sort of i don't know. i am by no means the great sage like ok don't go there. do this, even if it's the business side of creativity, it's like let my scars be helpful to you pretty much. kendra (23): yeah. and when you're interacting or working with the newcomers into your field can you tell if they are going to be successful?: pretty quickly. : well i'd say pretty quickly i have a sense of their, they if they got the thing or not and quite often they are like you know way beyond me. it's just recognizing sheer talent, and the question whether they have the work ethic to go along with it. which has also been the struggle for me, some inherent laziness, it's like i don't know where that comes from, it's like i could probably work on this. but i feel yeah pretty quickly i can kind of, i joked about starting a website am i really talented.com -laughs- : i give you my best like, we can charge you 19.99. yeah so within certain, within certain fields at least. acting wise in particular i feel i can pick that out pretty quickly.kendra (24): and what kind of characteristics do they have that your like bing, bing, bing, bing? like you are that thing.: i'd say it's, it's intuition.  : and kind of that out of the box thinking. just the imagination, if the imagination is really alive which is something that can be developed certainly and mine is like better than it was grown as i have invested in things to increase it, whether it's something as simple as giving yourself time to daydream every day and that kind of thing and i don't do that nearly enough. but the other thing is, how i put it, it's like a sense of the world and i would say a sense of history. which to me has to do with, being fairly well read and a sense of place in history, cause to me if there's, the artists that come to have these great ideas that really impact, to me they're more, how i put it, things like, not to slam on facebook, but that kind of like where we are constantly barraged with middle of the road, lowest common denominator kind of communication styles whatever and precious moment kittens, that kind of stuff that's, it's where you're getting your influences from i guess. i am getting it from the greats, from classics, from having a sense of, to me that was very important, i was a history minor was one of the, that i finally ended up with after my other majors like, at least for me that's been very important. i feel like that's, i get that somewhat from my teacher, like really encouraging, you need to be better read, you need to know more of the world around you and how we got to where we are and that kind of thing. in order to have something to say, yeah. kendra (26):  and do you notice any differences between men and women entering your field? are people more established as well?  : i don't think so. i mean i know it's more difficult typically for women to get work acting work in la i think but as far as the craft and how that, i don't really see differences that i am aware of.kendra (27): what advice would you give someone entering your field about balancing their personal and professional life?participant: good question. i feel like we do have the advantage of the world, the age that we live in, technology helps a lot, cause the only thing you get more of is time. the things that are, little things that can be done quicker and easier through a text or through you know digital stuff, something as simple as smartphones and being able to handle your finances without having to sit down and balance your check book like in the old days. those things are helpful just to create time. but i feel like the other piece of it is, intentionality of your use of time so if it's, who are the valued relationships in your life, who are the one's that are for lack of a better way to put it, givers not suckers, and to be, you have to be intentional. that's intentional time, that's once a week or an hour or a day or whatever that looks like depending on who the person is in your circle. and that's actually critical and the other end of the spectrum for me that i wrestle with a little bit because that's sort of the pastoral, caring, empathetic part of me is i can give too much, and then i am like left a quivering heap on the side of like you know –laughs- and it will take me three days to recover, it's like if i do that with a little bit more intentionality, maybe boundaries is a good word but i have had to learn how to and i'm better at it then i use to be. like jesus said the poorer you will always have with you, like i would say that the suckers the live suckers that you will always have with you. but learning how to manage that while, and even like knowing myself to know when i function better in hours of the day. : just self awareness in that and what do i, self discipline part actually you know, i know i want to eat this milky way right now but in a hour i don't want to feel like garbage, it's that thing you know.  : again i'm better than i use to be but not where i want to be. kendra (29): so have there been peers that have partially influenced or influential in shaping your personal and professional changes or identity?:  yeah. yeah very much so. like almost entirely. any change that has been really effective in my life and i feel like growth whether it's in kind of sense of identity who i am, how i am wired, how i tick. or in pursuing that creative pursuit, gosh i would say it all boils down to the people i am surrounded by, being able to have people, people that believe in you certainly which is a little, a little vague, i mean that's very important. people that will tell you the truth in love. but probably, i guess like creative professionally it's usually who i am working with. i can give you her name i don't know if you want it.  : ['s colleague 1].  : to have a, it's, okay, i grew up a preachers kid in the south, so i am an only child, kind of golden child, so i could do no wrong and everything i did was wonderful, i probably like shit gold bricks, and you know so to be around somebody that i know they've like because of where they have been and accomplished etc. etc. says to me your really good, you could do this but you need to blah blah blah, that compliment versus the others. that's shifting, that was life changing for me, cause it's like ok, that took that inner confidence level to i'm not just like whistling dixie here, you believe i can do it and i actually trust your opinion, a valued opinion. that was huge, i've had that two or three times, that probably most significant was hers actually more recently. yeah.  yeah. it's like you know should i go become a shoe salesman or i am wasting my time. -both laugh-kendra (32): in what ways do you think your family background was special in helping you become the person you are? : it's funny my whole family is adopted. my sister's cherokee, i have a chinese nephew, i have like, my folks got me when i was two weeks old, there's something about the sense of adoption, adoption is such a powerful, it can be at least, such a powerful thing, it's a powerful concept. and of course i take that in to christian faith, adoption is absolutely essential to that. that we've been adopted as sons of god. the idea of identity that draws out of it, i feel like it's always kind of giving me this sense of relational, loyalty, that's probably a good word, so it's kind of the idea of i feel like i will treat and give weight and loyalty to friendships a little bit more quickly maybe, i feel like that's true, coming from that place of adoption etc., that, those are themes that then if i am writing something or whether i'm creating those themes tend to kind of come in somewhere, seep in through the cracks. yeah, what is the question again? -laughs- : oh ok.kendra (34): yeah you answered, what did you spend most of your time doing as a child?: getting in trouble. -interviewer laughs- yeah, i was forever taking things apart, trying to put them back together, burning things, building things, building is a key one, always building forts or building some contraption, i took my, an old record player and gi joe and a bunch of construction paper and made this track with just scotch tape. -both laugh- it went around my room. it was this whole thing, and i remember a guy come in from the church who was like a plumber fixing something and he was like that boy's going to be an engineer. i just get bored easily i think, i don't know so i just, like in high school i remember being in the, i got in trouble for something i don't know, i was in detention, and detention was in the high school lab and so i proceeded, they had all these bunsen burners and i all these glass tubes : so i would like melt them into sculptures and like just making crap, i mean it was fun, i kind of wasn't taking it seriously but mostly was this like that creative wild hair will just get like an edge and usually get me up in trouble of some sort. -laughs-kendra (35): are your sibling also creative? : well. not really. no i have one sister, ['s sister], she's, no she's wired very differently, different gene pools so yeah. but singing we have that in common that's about it. kendra (36): and what about your parents? : well like my parents, my mom is a concert pianist my dad they met in like a southern gospel quartet, it's hilarious and they had a little tv show in like 1963 in [city 4], it's like this you can't write this stuff. but then i have found out what little i know about my birth parents, one was a music major, one was an art major, that's about it, yeah it makes sense. kendra (36) : and so where do your ideas for your work generally come from?: the ether, i don't know.  : it's funny i never liked reading when i was a kid. i kind of grown into that. but i know partly from other personality tests i have taken one called the clifton strengths finder remember that? one of these is fascination with ideas. be they philosophical or creative or and so i love i devour biographies, especially documentaries. i don't know if you can understand me.  : movie wise i love the biopics and biographies on the documentary world. and even reading books, most of the books i have read have been biographies. : and i don't know if that's like partly let me see the mistakes you made so i can try to avoid them myself, but there is something like a kind of identifying that comes out of that. and usually stimulates ideas as they sort of come, it's sort of like when i'm not thinking hard or not trying to come up with an idea it comes. and more often than not it feels like some sort of story element that sort of grabs me in some way. sometimes they're just stupid -laughs- random comedic cutting up, trying to make people laugh or whatever. usually it comes out of reading, most often or documentary that kind of stuff.  kendra (38): let's see. how important, you mentioned intuition, how important is intuition versus rationality in your work?: it's the ballgame. it's the whole ball game. rationality is only at the very front end, as those your laying out the ball field on which your playing the game and needs to be done with very particular rules and set a certain way. so if i'm breaking down a script for example there is very specific methods i go through which are very rational. and i'll ask you know for example what do i recognize, what does the character literally do in this scene, he walks through the door. something as simple as that. but at some point, i feel like my teacher would say this, the question of interpretation, once you've, let me put it this way in piano terms, my mom use to say this, there are people that, you can play your instrument or you can play through your instrument. so if i'm just playing the instrument, i'm very conscious of what note, what chord and oh god what key i am in now versus it's just motor memory and i am able to glide past that. and then in that place i am able to have some sort of interpretation that is very intuitive, very it just comes out of spirit, soul and my understanding. yeah so i would say it's vital but you can't have the one without the other. really to be most effective you need both. kendra (40): have you ever had a useful idea when addressing something else?: yeah. i will often make, anything from cooking to gardening to writing, to whatever one can stimulate definitely a epiphany or something creatively in a completely, seemingly disconnected thing. yeah. i'm trying to think of more specifics, i know of an experience but i am trying to think of a specific though. i'm blanking. kendra (41): it's alright. how many hours of sleep do you usually get?                                : nine. if i get less than nine i'm screwed. yeah. like eight is ok. i'm functional. consistently eight to nine hours yeah. kendra (41): and do you tend to do your best work early in the morning or late at night? : oh god. i feel like it varies, i know there's people like are night owls or whatever, i feel like i use to be that but i am really more like a three a clock in the afternoon guy.  : like first thing in the morning, or mid-afternoon is kind of my prime time.  : i do tend to do that. that's almost like i call it my producer brain. and the problem is i have to kind of manage cause i'll, the rational part, the strategy that part of it, it almost like a to me creativity is the hard work, the rational part of it is actually easier. and so i can sort of default to that and then almost never come out of it. -laughs- : at the expense of actually spending time, doing the homework and going to the creative places, so it's sort of this a little bit of attention there.  : i'm bad to just go and just try to vomit on the page and then just shape it later. but then writing it for example i haven't been the most successful at it yet. so that's probably why. i'm learning to do that. so cause what tends, i don't know it sounds contradictory to what i just said about the creativity part but for some reason the writing i tend to do more, i have a sense of where i want to land the plane, and then just like a stream of consciousness i just kind of go and then try to shape it after the fact and then i'll edit and shape and cut and paste or whatever. as opposed to hashing out like a finely tuned, when i've done that like an outline for example, i tend to like, i feel like a straight jacket of it, i can't quite, i don't know so there's a little bit of tension there. i go back and forth, screenwriting i've read feel like every book ever written and tried every model that everybody suggests from the 1995 guide to whatever the classics and i swim back and forth through all of them. sometimes i feel like using notecards, sometimes i feel like doing this guys way. : i'm easily bored. i think that's the primary challenge –laughs-kendra (44): do you prefer to work alone or on a team?  : depends on what i'm doing. film is obviously a collaborative art form so you have to work as a team and i actually enjoy that very much so long as you got a sense that your all on the same page and your all at similar experience levels or level of skill. but more often than not i tend to have more introverted than extroverted i'm kind of right on the border, borderline but if someone is just in the house, there's people around but not necessarily working with me, that seems to work really well. if i'm just by myself the crazies will come out at about 4:30.kendra (45): and how important is having an objective goal to your work or do you have a clear goal in mind with your work.  : i often do. there is side of my brain that's like i would call it strategic i have a sense of how to get you from a-z in the most efficient quick way possible. and that's the piece that kind of saves me to help me like get something actually done. at some point being even willing to like i'm going to sacrifice the creativity level. i just want to get the flipping thing done. just get it done. so that's kind of like the pendulum swing side for me. ask me the question again i feel like i am missing a piece. kendra (45): oh how important is having a goal? : oh okay so, well no very much so. i'd like to think that i can be creative on a regular basis and just be creative for creative sake. if i don't have a goal in mind i won't do it. based on what i know of myself to be true today. yes. kendra (46):  let's see. how much time during the day do you spend doing your work versus non work activity? : gosh it varies a lot since it's such like project oriented work so it comes in big spurts. i would say usually my max if i am in like production mode on something as opposed to a longer term project that's  kind of like a pet project if it's like something that i am getting payed to do  : probably my max during the day is like four or five hours until the muscle's exhausted. yeah i would say it tends to come work wise i tend to work better in like shorter spurts. like one or two hour blocks and then take a break come back.    kendra (47): and then are you thinking of mostly like acting?    : well i am right now cause that's what i am working on primarily at the moment but if it's like a writing project or i guess if it's just like creativity as a bigger loop of stuff it's kind of a collection of of little chunks there's like an hour here, there's two hours here, i might be working on a song, working on different stuff. so there's a lot of things going on at once. that's pretty common in which case finishing is always the challenge.                                                       kendra (48): and then what are the hobbies that you participate in?: oh, cooking definitely. i love to cook. it's kind of like therapy. plus it's creative i think it's one of the first things i latched on to actually like developing creativity. cause my mom was a great cook but then she started working full time so i combination of entertained myself and just sort of exploring and experimenting. my poor grandfather was my guinea pig. -interviewer laughs- he managed to live for another twenty-five years. -laughs-after i started cooking. piano i would definitely, i don't do it professionally but i love just sitting in my room and just, cause thankfully my mom started me young enough it's sort of a second language. so it's very therapeutic as well. what else. hobbies i don't know i mean i always feel like saying movies as a weak sauce answer for that but i think it's very true cause i have a, i love classic film especially and just kind of pushing what i'm watching. which kind of goes with reading as well. yeah trying to think if there is anything else. methamphetamines just kidding. i think that's it.  : oh absolutely.  : it all goes together. cause i know sometimes, the cooking thing for example. like i can get lost in a description of if i'm describing a steak or whatever, i can just because i love the like the strategy piece i was talking about, it comes and like how do i get you where i want to get you as the reader or the audience is to viscerally experiencing this steak as you know specific and as like exactly how i experienced it. so in the shape of the words and the images and what i'm allowing, all of that, to get you from, that's how it kind of comes together. and there's something incredibly satisfying if i have sense of in communicating a sentence that i have crafted and shaped so when you read it or you watch the scene your getting exactly what i intended. that's even a director side of my brain that i haven't fully developed yet, but done a little bit here and there but yeah i'd say it all works together. kind of my palette.      : yeah. kendra (51): do you kind of believe that? or does that kind of ring true to you personally? : well, based on what i understand of studying other artists as well i think that seems very true. i'm still at a place where i am trying to increase my volume of work and get to, it's it's still been, it comes in spurts of when i'm not necessarily flipping burgers but i have to do this to pay for life and do life stuff and so if i am an actor for example and you're getting one audition every blue moon or if it's once a week then you're doing pretty good or whatever so it's just to be able to get to booking a job and getting work and building a body of work it's like this long thing so i am kind of jealous of the sculptor or the painter who can just sit down and go.  : and so the discipline for the acting side of it for me is just to build that level amount of work, is something i have to be willing to like do it just for the sake of doing it. it may never be seen or and so it's that added kind of almost entrepreneurial thing but i feel like it's more difficult because it takes that much longer to get to a place and have a sense of a body of work so i don't know talk to me in twenty years. -laughs-kendra (52): do you feel like you produce more or fewer kind of works than your peers? : oh gosh. oh yeah i am sure i do. i can think of any number of people who are far more prolific than i am. and i'm not sure what that's about. like kendra (53):  so you think you produce fewer? : i do, yeah. i tend to be a perfectionist when i am, especially writing wise, it's been difficult for me to kind of break out of the habit of from in terms of writing, talking about shitty first drafts, writing and writing and writing, like it, i'll get in that zone, but then it takes everything i have to stay in that zone, usually i end up slipping back into what's more of my kind of normal gear, which isn't the most productive. so that's where i kind of learned better how to help myself be more productive. which has, can involve all different kind of things not least of which we were talking about people and relationships. those that give life and those that take it away.     kendra (54): yeah. do you feel like you spend more time on each work than others then? : i feel like i am slower than most people.  : yeah. but i know everybody works, there are so many different ways of working creatively if i take acting as just the one frame that i am looking at. yeah i'm kind of like, and i don't know if it's accurate to say that i am slow, it just that it comes and go in like spurts. oh ok. and the spurts are can be very focused spurts of creativity of work. but to me it still seems like a long, awful amount of time between the spurts that i would like to lessen. because i feel like i can do more. so there's that internal push. kind of self challenge. yeah. and then there's people that are just more talented than i am. yeah that make me want to do more etc. but that's part of that ongoing growth, push i guess yeah.       kendra (55): so another theme we have is working memory. so creativity is often seen as the ability to join together different thoughts or ideas to be able to create something that's new. so how do you bring together ideas in your mind?          : oh gosh. that sometimes if i am working on creating let's say a piano piece. so i have several just kind of floating through time on the last however many, fifteen, twenty years of songs and melodies that i have written. that can sort of, pieces of one that i can feel the influence if it's not literal in a piece that i am writing but the patterns of chords, certain kind of sound, i can definitely see it there i think. i definitely get it in writing, screenwriting especially, projects that i have worked on that are ideas whether it's like for example the idea of adoption so that's like that's something over here and i'm working on a story here that has nothing to do with it. and it just sort of like see the pieces need to connect and bring them together and picturing how to do that and sort of like filling in the blanks in between the two. drawing those connections so i have definitely seen it in the writing room as well. and cooking, yeah, definitely this herb is good, let me try that herb over here and see what happens. that kind of thing.                     kendra (57):  so it's kind of like experimental?: very experimental. i'm sort of, i tended to be like in the technology world they talk about first adopters,  : that's sort of me. and i have gotten burn so many times now i'm a little bit gun shy but that tends to be i want to jump and dive in and experiment and try everything and work it and switch the buttons and ooh what does this do and you know that kind of thing. i'm not sure how that relates to this question.                                   : yeah. : it's very experimental. definitely. the erector set when i was a kid. like all of that stuff.       kendra (58): so some people describe themselves as focused and others as distractible. do you feel like you might fit\: oh very distractible. i'm like a cat with a shiny ball. oh dear god.kendra (58): -laughter- and are you the kind of person who retains information well or do you forget things quickly?   : i generally been able to memorize pretty easily. which is great on set. so if i'm intentional yes. my problem becomes if i'm not intentional or if i'm distracted or really if it's more like disengaged. like there's not an intentionality of connection for me in what i'm doing. i will forget. yeah. and it can look like absent mindedness but i feel like what happens when that's going on is there are ideas working in my brain. again one of the personality tests i mentioned earlier i know one of the descriptions they talk about it is strength is ideation, a fascination with ideas. that some people may think you're spacy. -laughs- cause you're in your head quite often, and just there is a churning and there's never silent. there's always something going on. but it can look like i'm detached from around me. so if you're sitting here then i will not remember your name or not remember what color blouse your wearing etc. etc. that's an area i learned to grow in and be more, that's where acting may have helped to be grounded, experiencing the moment and yeah.   : i can understand being perceived that way  : but it's not. yes that is absolutely true. which forget my head if it wasn't attached. very sanguine.kendra (59):  so our last key theme is response inhibition. so sometimes creative people may need to be, may need to be disinhibited in order to produce new things, while on the other hand they may also need to inhibit conventional ideas or habits in order to be able to rise up to do something that's new. do you feel that you like either one strikes a chord with you or both?    : well that was actually part of my experience of grad school where i again growing up preacher's kid and kind of church environment so it was my first time of like here's a hundred and ten approaches to this one issue and here's how they came to that and you pick and kind of like the freedom to think outside the box and to learn how to ask good questions and not be afraid of hard questions and this kind of thing. definitely opened up everything else i feel it's very tied to that. yeah so that sense of being uninhibited has been absolutely critical. really to be able to explore in freedom without editing yeah i don't see how you create without that in place your art is really going to be limited and what you're able to do and express. yeah. kendra (1:01): do people characterize you as impulsive?: yeah. i've gotten that many times. kendra (1:01): what about compulsive?  : no. kendra (1:01):  and then do people say or do you feel that you may have adhd? : i i don't have it. i can i mean there's moments when it feels that way but i feel like that's just the world we live in is a constantly distracted world so which is why i have a love hate relationship with internet, facebook and texting and everything else.   : cause i have some sense of my limitations. and like yeah i don't need things to help me be more distracted. so the distraction piece again, it sort of ties together, i don't know adhd like i never tried to be diagnosed or whatever and i don't think i would fit it, and i think there's aspects of it i relate to, and wonder about sometimes and like am i? cause sometimes i can find it difficult to stay on one thought for very long.   : i want to jump. or just like yeah don't don't fence me in. -laughs-kendra (1:02): so my last question is probably the most important question. and that is, what is important about your creative expression that we have not covered?: oh gosh.    : i, well, and gain with creativity there's so many different, piano for example is i would say as far like the energy of the whole person, if i'm playing a piece let's say it's a classical piece and there's expression or whatever and i'm involved in it maybe that's drawing twenty percent of my energy at that time. there's like that amount of focus is going up but the amount of  i feel like of me coming out in that moment through those notes through what i'm playing which is awesome, writing is more intense cause your essentially creating an entire world and there's much more space for you to come through but there's much more opportunity to be to shape and edit it. so that's kind of interesting. it demands more but you have more opportunity to kind of control it. part of what i feel drawn to acting is it's the one place where it's at its highest and it's best i feel like you really can have 100% of you, unedited, in a shape, should have a shape to it, that comes from rehearsal and the shaping and repetition but at the end of the day when you're there you're like fully there fully focused, you're flying.  : and so i feel like in my head it's like almost like this peak creatively that is why i keep approaching it and even if i fall down i get up and re-approach it and keep coming at it. i've been doing that my whole life basically because it's the, it feeling like that moment where you feel fully alive and fully like firing on all cylinders. my when i'm playing piano, in really wonderful moments i am getting a lot of that but over here like it's somehow more and it's like it's also more satisfying, more difficult but it's more satisfying in a way too. so it's interesting, yeah. i am still thinking about your question though. like what don't you know. well i don't know to me the creative spark it's this non negotiable that you either have to answer it or kill it. and i don't know that i could successfully kill it if i tried because it's almost like, like asking about impulsiveness versus compulsiveness, it's almost like this tea kettle that the steam is going to come out somewhere and so i have to find, just for survival i have to find those places to let it come out. and i guess the question in this picture if i am putting more water in the pot, and i don't know (laughter) and if it all breaks down after a while. yeah but my willingness for most creatives like creative artists to be, especially if your trying to make a living at that your willingness to eat more ramen noodles etc. etc. where nothing else really matters i relate to that on a very visceral level because it's like breathing, you find the combination for me of like identity stuff and growing self understanding, self awareness and the freedom to do that. that just causes this whatever this creativity thing is, this you know divine spark or joke or whatever, it's got to come out somewhere the more i do that the more satisfaction the more like you feel settled in your own skin and it's like i mean it's intangible but i don't know it's like you can't i can't not do it. which is i really when i'm talking younger coming in newbies actors or whatever that sort of question i say this is got to be something you can't not do cause it's too difficult otherwise.  : but if it's that then i got your back and –both laugh we'll take this melt and you know. yeah. : oh my pleasure.  : how long is it? : oh my god, of all the things what am i most proud of um uh i think i would say my family actually my two daughters my husband that we have a good family in that you know i think one of the things i am so grateful for is that from really early on we would go to see a family therapist when they were really little and even before you know there were necessarily any issues per say but just that we had that process of being together kind of willing to talk about things together that the kids could see that my husband and i were willing to be self-reflective to want to improve interactions with each other you know i just think and when my older daughter turned thirteen, her and i kind of tended to butt heads more than with my younger one but it was such a godsend in a way she already uh it wasn’t like i was suddenly dragging her to therapy whereas it was a resource and she would say we have to go talk to [family therapist] about this so it was like [family therapist] was as much as a resource for her as she was for me and it really helped us navigate that and i feel very proud of how my two girls have a real emotional intelligence that i think other kids maybe don’t so i feel really you know good about that i mean because that a value of mine you know how my family has gotten along yeah.  : um well i mean you know i love that i always had an interest in psychology and interactions and relationships and so that’s what i studied and have my phd on i remember reading parenting books and when my younger one was little i would read some of the things to her out of the parenting book and she was kind of interested it was quite amazing you know and then she'd turn around and use those same things on me remember i really can't be the one like you're saying i'm making you mad but you're making the choice to be mad you know there's like wait a minute that’s not fair you're not supposed to turn it around on me but anyway so that was one thing yeah so was it the question about that particular thing or other things i feel proud about?   : well um that’s an easy one to get to that has to do with grief and loss. so before i had my i had my first daughter i had a pregnancy that was my first pregnancy i was nine months pregnant basically a week from my due date and the artery to my spleen spontaneously ruptured, so you basically bleed to death really fast. i'm very lucky that i'm alive that i survived that with all my faculties and everything but i lost the baby in the process because i lost so much blood so fast and the body just shuts down blood flow to unessential organs and unessential places and so by the time i was able to get to the hospital and do a c-section the baby had already lost too much blood and didn’t survive and they were scrambling to save me i was in the intensive care in the hospital for a total of eleven days and intensive care for four so that whole process of dealing with that loss, my near death, and sort of recovering from that and then the following, let's see not even –– okay like six months later the following year nine months later or so i actually had the courage to try again and i got pregnant and ended up having a miscarriage, that one. so that was like it was just this series of losses you know that was the first one i could kind of say well the doctors well the baby saved my life because the fact that i had the extra blood volume no normal person would of survived this amount of blood that i lost things like this and somehow i was able to maybe put there were some rhyme or reason i didn’t know helped saved my life but then the second time with it just being a miscarriage it was just like now this is just a cruel joke and i don't get it. so that was the hardest thing to overcome and i you know again very grateful for support that i got through therapy in a way through a person who was trained in a special process for dealing with trauma, and it really was emotional trauma so that you know, really helped me so you know together having the support system that i had and this extra process you know for dealing with that. but it was you know first time in my life i ever understood that people would have to need therapy or something i wasn’t sure how i was going to get from monday to friday, you know there was just emotional devastation and for the first time i could kind of understand how devastated people could get, where they might just either just want to kill themselves or inflict harm on other people you know i could understand getting to that place. and then so but i'm very lucky that i had the support you know get through that i mean i do feel it took warrior strength in me to want to try again after that and have my two daughters. : it was both yes family well certainly my husband and friends and it was through friends i made the contact with this woman you know who was a therapist trained in a special technique for dealing with trauma. she literally offered me those sessions. she said she heard from our friend what had happened and just i was like really kind of amazing that you know kind of spiritual support in a way from my spiritual community you know all that helped yeah  : um well yeah i mean in a way. so prior to that i was on the trajectory i had completed my phd in clinical psychology and i was working on collecting my postdoctoral hours towards getting licensed i would go on to become a therapist psychologist and so that event life changing so i was kind of headed in that direction and then that happened and you know it makes you really start to assess, like you don’t know how long or short life might be. and i didn’t hear myself say i absolutely love doing therapy. you know and i always really loved working with my husband, i loved doing administrative work so at that point also because i was in such need of just taking care of myself that i stopped collecting my postdoctoral hours and so i stopped going in that direction and then eventually when i did go on to have my first daughter i ended up working with my husband in our own business he's a graphic designer so i help do all the administrative stuff for his business it was very convenient when the girls were little that we had that opportunity. i mean i had that opportunity to be in our own business and be flexible so that was great, and then post 9/11 the economy just tanked and his business, it was always project to project but somehow always weathered previous economic downturns really well but this time no, and i was like oh my god maybe i should have separate income so we're not both in the same business that’s like doing this -shows a rollercoaster- so  there can at least be something  from the side so i that’s when i started to think okay i'll go back to the therapy route and consider getting my license and finishing i had started that way. so i was kind of headed in that route until this job at ucla landed in my lap and uh you know i was like well its administrative work its being an assistant to the chair of neurology and i was like –– it was going to take me quite a while doing the therapy route to get enough income to get finish my hours and then was like full time full benefits you now doing administrative stuff which i actually like but yet in a setting where they are studying the mind the medical aspect so that was a great serendipitous thing that shifted me into what i've been doing here administrative work but i enjoy it. : so did that answer the question  : oh goodness um what advice. um well i do think education is just really important. even though it's like i was up to here in education and degrees and obviously –– i don’t know education is just really important i mean i just that sort of may be a platitude, but you know even though i've been sort of overqualified in terms of i had more education that i needed for this position but it's all like come in handy and it allows me to you know to always think of i'm always looking to improve something how to make it better and um you know i love when i can learn new skills and new things even in administrative stuff i mean somebody showing me something i didn’t know a certain program to do it's like oh that’s great you know like education always staying to where you're learning stuff because its either helpful for this or something else might come along like i did the pdp, the professional development program at ucla, and i just always think when you put yourself out to try something new be in a new learning situation you never know new opportunities opened up for me from that did not necessarily directly at a direct line from that but just i don’t know new stuff opened up in the department that i now am working on this nih grant that i was not doing that before and it's not that it came because of that but i think because i opened myself to just learning new things you know i just think sort of something shifts things can open up in different ways so that’s yeah. always staying open. : uh well you know i think it just has a value –– well i mean i feel like i provide a value to the faculty, i mean we can't all do everything, i mean i don't necessarily like to be somebody who's up in front of people doing presentations that sort of thing you even some of the scientific stuff the faculty are doing even after my phd i thought if i never do another science project i will be very happy i was like done. with these people it was like one grant after the other it was like oh my god its really amazing it feels good to provide, they have that you know drive or ability to want to do all that and its i feel good in being able to provide processes or things that makes it easier for them to do what they can do, you know just i can track and handle all the details of stuff that their minds don't care to get involved in. doing that well frees them up to accomplish what they need to accomplish. like on the grant i'm on now it just feels good to be that resource because it’s a multi-center grant and a lot of i'm able to hold the information in a way other people can access it or, you know just being able to communicate things in a way that's clear and simple for other people to see and relate to you know it may seem like just an email but i really how you organize the concepts here are the three things i want from you: one two and three,  you know so they can just see it and know what they can respond to really quickly i mean it's simple but you know i don’t know it helps anyway i feel good being in a support role as opposed to others doing these you know taking on the bigger stuff and challenging things and you know so   : yes, certainly... i mean you know i'd say almost in some ways now not entirely i guess i turned sixty this year i'm looking towards retirement and you know there's time i do think i don’t really care to push myself that much, or i mean you know i was assistant to the chair for nine years and this opportunity to take on being the administrative director for this large grant came up and i'm really glad it did because it was like a whole new set of other experiences or skills that i got to learn and i think if i had just stayed i could see it after a while another holiday punch we got to put together or this it becomes too repetitive or you know already just the same kind of thing that can kind of get like ugh. so i'm glad it shifted and changed into this i mean there's times now this i'm like uh... where different aspects of this particular job are tiring too in some way. so i guess you know i don’t know what is the question again  : yeah um you know i guess um for me it's you know always finding something new to look at and how can i make it better i guess always looking for some way to sort of improve things partly i like tracking details its sort of fun in my mind my mind has fun doing it helps me, and you know i guess that and interactions with people are good and now hearing myself talk it's like putting myself in new experiences that’s helpful. even if maybe over here it's you know getting dry i can still try something new or different in another arena as well that helps.  : hmm well it was certainly it made it enjoyable to work together i don’t know necessarily for the administrative stuff well i mean dr. barber vicori [coworker 1] (spelled wrong) who i work with on this large nih grant i would say was a pivotal person in that she was always pushing the envelope in the department like getting processes going to improve stuff and you know when i worked with her on certain projects even though and this was before it worked out for me to be able to work with her on this grant we were doing something for the department um related to developing this kind of career planning piece that was part of faculty salary negotiations and stuff and you know she would have these you know ideas and kind of download this stuff and i'd kind of try of like give it form and put it together and create. i was like always impressed i thought partly you know working with her it always kind of pushes you like she's not satisfied with it being –– it's like another step more but i sort of like appreciated that it would pull even more out of me i kind of you know my own energy just let go i always felt somehow a little pushed to accomplish even more so that really was helpful and inspiring yeah. : um yes. i mean as part of the pdp program i did i have i did do mentoring they have this thing where you become a buddy to somebody else who's just came into the program and then you the coworkers in a way i really enjoy kind of sharing like sharing information and like yen who was my assistant in the chair's office who moved into becoming assistant to the chair took on this other piece you know i always worked with her even how she'll say, do you mind having an extra set of eyes on this, look at it a lot of this sort of format, we like to format emails and different stuff she really took that on and carries it on like really well and we have this new assistant now as part of the grant thing and so i've been you know kind of working with her. i'm happy to understand that you got to you know like not just throw her into meeting minutes and expect her to know what to do, it's like do them in tandem for a while give her feedback and then slowly kind of encourage them to do it on their own, that sort of thing. so yeah i would say with most coworkers i like to share stuff and help : hmm i guess so.  : i would say a certain amount of initiative and organization like yen [coworker 2] was really, like she's someone that been really able to like you know, able to take on certain projects and eventually owning them doing them herself she's very organized. like i'm organized but she's like oh she did that, so you know so i can learn some from her style of organizing. um and then but the person that sort of filled in assistant to her like both yen [coworker 2] and i kind of recognized she doesn’t have the skill set you know because she's had to work with her really hard on certain things and she's got to where it's like yeah okay, but like she doesn’t have that look you can see she wouldn’t be able to jump in what yen's [coworker 2] doing while yen [coworker 2] was able to jump in what i had done and manage that whole area so you know we were with her the best that we can that sort of drive or initiative to want to learn to take on certain stuff isn't visible.  : hmm. well there uh there aren't very many men in sort of administrative kind of level that i really interact with in fact they're pretty much all women. i mean unless you know at the –– i mean i'm sort of involved with dean's office level meetings, i manage the faculty executive committee but those are all faculty members they're the chair of that, the chair, and vice chair, they're all men right now although we have women on the committee. it's not like a peer um trying to think i mean in my department right now peers that i interact with like sort of like my administrative level there aren't really any guys.  : there are chief administrative officers who are men for different departments yeah so the question was about? : balancing personal and professional life, you've got to do it. yeah it's hard sometimes well for me it's like i have to remember how important it is to take care of myself, and you know get my exercise and go to my ballet classes, and all the things that i love. sometimes what i have to do in my head, when i'm going "oh that thing i should do tonight after work that i need to get done" and sometimes what i've kind of told myself the ticket for me to get to work on that i have to do something for myself like go to ballet class. i'm not allowed to do the work stuff until i've you know done that thing for myself first. i mean sometimes i'm successful and sometimes not, but it's something i've kind of tried to work on. you know like okay if i can't give myself an hour or whatever do something fun or do something for me then i don't get to have another hour of work. so yeah you know have to have good friends and family i think that’s a thing that really helps balance it all out. : well um i think i mean i had good enough parents, good parents i mean basically loving, fortunately i did not have i didn't have a traumatic you know childhood no horrid stuff to deal with, no abuse, and when you think of people who had to overcome that it's like ugh. so i mean i'm grateful for that kind of basic background like that i was one of seven kids, i grew up in a very big family being almost one of the youngest i have one younger brother the rest are older. so as a little person coming into this big matrix of people that was at times overwhelming. you know but i spent a lot of time observing interactions and behavior. some of it was scary at times i mean only in that you know my dad was very kind of vocal and could get angry really easily like as a kid. so even though there wasn’t like abuse and stuff like that but just like scary things, and i think in some ways i some of that growing up it was personality my other siblings it's just so interesting my older sister kathy  [older sister 1] was never afraid of my dad always stood up to him you know she ended up being this like majorly successful in business in an industry that was mostly men you know and she rose to the ranks of you know there it was from early on. she always stood up, i was like more um shy and afraid i guess you know in some ways and so that’s just interesting. but i spent a lot of time observing a lot of interactions and i think that interest in relationships and people maybe my interest in psychology sort of came out of it growing up in such a big family with so many people. um and yeah but basically that, and at the same time i guess family was more like i didn’t have a lot of friends because i already had this built in community in a way but that being said family and friends is important. and it also kind of set up maybe in some ways some of that growing up was so chaotic in a big family that i really it made me really want to have a home environment that was harmonious and peaceful you know, so when it came to looking for a spouse i wanted this kind of harmony which thankfully we have mostly, and a smaller family that'll do it right there. did that answer your question? : in nature actually, i mean loved, i was very physical, i loved movement and dance, so you know i have these memories retreating from the house outside. wonderful memories of being in nature i mean we lived in la somewhere kind of near la, we weren't in the rural areas or anything. my favorite memories you know were the times i would ride my bike to a creek area not far from my house and just spend time exploring in the nature that was there. i loved exercise and movement i did swimming and diving and yeah those are very satisfying. : um yes so um well my dad was a businessman, he was very smart, but a different kind of creative not what i would call artistically creative, but he did love to sing. his first language was italian but grew up in the us i mean was born here he had as a young man though that he was going to be an opera singer and he sang in a church choir or something like that but the one thing as an adult that could get him crying was him singing opera. it was just an emotional thing for him so that was maybe one way how he expressed it i mean he didn’t ever i mean have any –– i don’t know what his hobbies or any other artistic accomplishment. my mom you know she was just so busy raising seven kids. i think she was probably artistic but i don’t know –– now in terms of the siblings like i don’t know how it was expressed per say yeah. but my siblings, my oldest sister maria is very talented artist, painter, i mean she has done amazing paintings, like people and faces she can really do that kind of paintings and landscapes beautiful stuff. she's too ill right now, she's in her seventies, she got leukemia and anyway so right now she isn't still doing her painting unfortunately. my sister carol, second, also very artistic she always did like pottery and different stuff. my sister kathy the one that i was saying is the mega business person you know major extremely wealthy she made all her money like good for her, but she's very artistic she loves plants i mean she's –– photography does photography stuff and i'm trying to think my other siblings (lists them off), not necessarily artistic. : two. : my older brother chelso (?) my younger brothers raymond and then there's me and four older sisters so that’s them. : um...  : well uh yes reading some and ideas for my work... um i mean i'm always i'll appreciate when i see or hear something done a certain way and i like it and i think oh maybe we can do this way for this uh and then otherwise i always, i guess i always want to try to improve things and do something differently or make it you know, if i put on an event or something and something didn’t work it's like okay next time so what did i learn from this so it's kind of learning from mistakes i think is a good inspiration. and trying new things or exposing myself to –– i mean like i did a little workshop recently that was done by survey monkey somehow i ended up being the survey person in my department and they had this like a webinar thing about some other aspect of survey monkey that can be used if you're doing different review things like if you have a lot of documents you need a group of people to review like you could set it up in survey monkey –– i don’t know it was more complex in a way that you could centralize you know had documents that needed to go to certain people they need to review it and get back to you that you could have a central place\  : \to kind of house that whole process so i mean i listened on the webinar hmm can i apply it here there better than i though ugh it's a lot of work to create this whole system would be good you know uh and then when with ucla stuff it all has to be hipaa compliant and this and that not do too much stuff in the web and or the cloud so to speak, i kind of you know –– it's just good to get that exposure to something else to cause my mind to think well hmm how could that apply here. it's fun to think about i don’t necessarily have the time to make it happen or maybe that could happen later on we'll see. : um, that’s a hard one.  i guess, lets think. its actually not related to what i do for research. its um i played piano, or i guess i used to, i haven't played in a year, but there was this one piece that i always thought was really just impossible and i worked towards it and i was actually able to learn it and play it well enough that i could get beyond the technique and really focus on putting more emotion into it and making it my own and i guess being creative with it rather than just playing it mechanically.  i never thought i'd be able to do that. : chopin etude opus 25 number 12. : chopin etude opus 25 number 12.  although, i think there are a lot of piano pieces like that.  or maybe not a lot but a few of the ones i've tried. they're kind of daunting to learn at the beginning.   :  um just trying a lot.  repetition i suppose or persistence.  i was actually just thinking about how i would respond to a question of creativity too.  i think its just about not giving up more so than just sitting and being struck by a bolt from the blue.   : i think a lot of the success i've had in other parts of my life i can probably attribute to just to the mentality you get of being a musician where you practice over and over and perfect something like piano pieces, for example.   : lets see.  it depends on how you define the obstacle i suppose. : is this one that i have overcome or am still working on? : ok. : lets see. a one that i'm working on is probably related to anxiety, but that seems quite difficult right now.  just because trying to overcome obstacles that affect your thought process you worry about personal bias and thoughts affecting your decisions so kind of goes into an infinite loop and that in regard. worrying about worrying, not the greatest thing ever.   : um, i think its actually been something i've struggled with all of my life.  its why i've done most of the things people say i'm creative for like quilting or playing the piano to distract myself so that i don’t think about the problem that’s not actually dealing with it is it?  i guess in some sense i can deal with it through those things, but : yeah. : when i started scientific research with my advisor, i think that was really a turning point. : yeah. : because up to that point i hadn't really, i'm not gunna say that i hadn't realized i could make decisions and try and improve myself consciously, i just hadn't really, well i guess like comparing being asleep to being awake.  its like i woke up.  and not just from doing research, he's been a really incredible mentor, just learning things from him aside from research to just about like about ways to think about things in a more positive light or to do better and deal with certain things that might hold me back otherwise like anxiety.  the most successful thing i've done so far is just to do what's making you anxious and it will be done. : yeah.   : oh, i was in a class with him.  it was actually kind of a lot of things that i would say while looking back that i would say i am glad that happened that was by chance.  because i was interested in started research i guess in something chemistry related and then i was in civil engineering, so that’s not necessarily a close thing to chemistry when people think of chemistry.   : yeah, i was taking it with him and there was another - our department does seminars where each professor presents their research so you know kind of what's going on, and i thought it was interesting so i talked to him and started working for him and then got really interested in it and that’s that. : um, well he expects a lot, so he really challenges you to be not just ok but really excellent, which is i guess not something people will do, or they wont be as blunt about it as he is, which some people find really too much, but its good. : yeah, and then when you do a good job he will actually praise you and it feels so good when that happens.  whereas i guess i almost think of him like a parent almost, because i think the reason i appreciate it so much is that my dad has such high standards, i don’t think he'll ever be pleased and my mom is effusively praising so i cant even trust if she thinks things are really good, so. : yeah, sorry if i seem a little nervous. : um, recent ones? : there are.  i still am currently investigating those so i'm not sure how it will turn out.   : in my field in particular?   : um, i guess find something that really interests you.  i'm not sure how to say to go about that because i was lucky and i found something, but maybe just don’t be too discouraged by, i'm not just going to say coursework is a bad thing but a lot of the times there is a lot of required coursework for engineers and you have to do multiple tracks and its good to have breadth of knowledge but a lot of times people are discouraged because they feel they have to do a lot of things that are unnecessary.  so i guess learnt o appreciate why you have to take certain courses and don’t let it distract you from what you're actually interested in.  so like after i started research i just took chemistry courses on top of the engineering curriculum, so it wasn’t the best for my gpa but it was good to do.  i think it got me through some of the less fun structural engineering courses. : yeah.  well because really the work were doing, although i'm not doing a lot of the civil engineering side, its good to know a little bit about what you make concrete what its going to be used for.  and for chemistry its nice to know the mechanisms of the reaction and the geology where minerals came from.  so i took geology chemistry and then material science classes too.  so : should i avoid continuing to respond until its fixed? : i'd also say its probably part of trying to do too much almost.  : i've always wanted to do a lot of things and its not always feasible, so sometimes i end up doing too much and doing it ok and not doing it as well as i could, but : yeah.  or i wasn’t in talking in regrets to this but in regrets to this it was a good decision.  : i mean i think there's a balance between wanting it all and being realistic but you need to achieve to be actually successful and i'm not sure if i have achieved it yet.  i mean i know i haven't. : yeah.   : um specialize early and then change your mind a lot.  that’s what i would advise.  because i mean if you think you're really interested in something, do a lot of it and see if it works.  if you aren't happy doing this all day then maybe try something else. : hm? : um, i suppose it depends on the actual merit of the idea in particular.  i guess, well as the periphery do you mean i guess cold fusion or some topic that’s kind of taboo that some people are like that’s a little bit skeptical if you publish research on it i mean? : i guess for that i think i would be in align with what my advisor thinks which would be i guess if you're doing something that a lot of other people have done, do it so well no one will ever have to do it again.  so do a really, really thorough study that has a useful outcome that’s not just some a little bit incremental improvement or take an idea on the periphery and bring it in the mainstream and make it the new thing.  but, yeah.  because a lot of, um i've not been in our field for a long time but apparently a lot of the improvements in our field are incremental or empirical and that’s not the greatest, so. i think guided by my advisor i've been trying to bring knowledge from the other fields in.  make myself a hybrid, so i can help. : for cement chemistry? : id say cement is a building material and is used in incredible quantities i would say maybe only second to water.  i forgot the exact statistic but i think its 3 cubic meters per person per year that’s produced of concrete and the binder component of that is cement, so a lot of the properties depend on the binding, the cement matrix around the aggregate which is just rocks you throw in to save on cost.  but, if you can reduce the carbon impact and use something else besides cement, that will have a significant impact even if its little because there's so much material. : to reduce carbon impact, i suppose yes. : both.  i think its been a good opportunity to apply- i suppose we are calling it creativity here- my creativity to help society other than just to make something that looks nice or sounds nice, which is great too. : yeah.  i mean i think you can do those things with art and playing piano too but i cant, so i can do with this. : my research specifically? : yes, some projects there's a lot of um, there's an industry pressure to avoid change actually because cement is cheap, people use it for cheap construction purposes and if its and it works and its, there's basically no need to change it in a lot of people's minds.  so some of our projects have just been testing for companies and we still do a bit more and we get in the publishing papers which are useful but some of the projects haven't been incredibly engaging.   : yeah, or for example maybe they'd send us a couple ad mixtures and we'd make a range of mixtures and see how they function with supplemental cementing materials and send them the data.  so its useful but it’s the kind of approach we're trying to avoid with our work.  after our work we want there to be predictive models where eventually it will enable people to circumvent empirical testing and just say this is how it will work. : yeah, of course. : i suppose yes.  there's also just some topics that don’t intellectually grab me as much.  like some people in our lab do work on cracking or heat transfer and it may just be because i don’t know about those fields enough yet.  but at the moment, its not what i would choose to do. : no, but i think really it’s a good thing because if i knew more i think i would be interested in almost anything. : its really, its also a balance of like distraction versus, like the distraction aspect of curiosity versus the focus if you're curious, you're curious about so much and then you want to delve deeply into something so you want to pick one eventually.  i get distracted a little easily.  my advisor called it shiny object syndrome, which is pretty accurate.  but yeah. : my parents, obviously.  that would be up until the point i met my advisor probably.  well my mom because i try to be like a good person like she is and i try not to be like my dad is, so.  he's a little bit of a narcissist.  that’s where a lot of my anxiety come from, trying not to become that way. : yeah, um, lets see, i wouldn’t say she's the greatest role model i've had.  she sometimes lets people walk over her and ignores problems like i do.  i get that from her, but she's so nice and even when bad things happen she can deal with it.  i mean even though a lot of people might find her to be emotional, id say she's like the most resilient person i know.  i'm really glad she raised me because otherwise i might not be able to deal with certain things as well as i do.   : yeah, i'm still working on it.  i just feel like i'm not doing a good enough job when i do it.  i've mentored a couple of students for a lab, like um. i don’t remember how many specifically but, a lot of the time its hard to get past teaching them the basics of the field and get them interested in the topic.  a lot of them, a lot of the undergraduates in our lab end up leaving to do club activities, which is a little bit sad. : oh, the civil engineering department has a club, asce. : yeah. : or they can become officers or project managers and they do interesting stuff like seismic design and concrete canoe which is even a little close to what we do, and then other things on all of the branches of civil engineering.  so it makes sense that not everyone would be interested in materials and stay, but i think beyond that i want to find a way to instill motivation and curiosity in people, even if they leave.  and i don’t think i'm at that point yet where i can.  i haven't developed a reliable way of doing it.  so they’ll want to go keep learning and read on their own.   : i guess i ask them a lot what they think is interesting or how things are going.  or which part of the research they really like and put them on that and have them work on it.  but, in a more general sense its hard to know.  i think it would take longer than just a year of mentoring.  i think it would take your whole life to instill something like that in someone. : i hope i do. : like why do i want to know everything i guess? : um, i'm not sure it’s the greatest reason but i'm not even sure if its entirely from trying to live up to my dad's expectations, but probably from that.  like, i guess i'm a little bit of a perfectionist, so i always want to do better.  its hard to be satisfied with, i guess to some degree that’s necessary intellectual satisfaction or just you cant be complacent you cant be like, this is good enough,  lets just go with that.  so maybe, i guess it comes back to the thing with classes if the people feel their spread too thin they'll just do well in their classes and then they’ll be so exhausted afterwards they wont want to do anything else or focus on what their interested in if their classes aren't that, so, i don’t think i would want anyone else to be such a perfectionist, so i don’t think it makes me very happy. : um... : let's see, not sure about staying or leaving but about being successful, usually its with um, i've actually been thinking for my advisor if there's a way for him to better screen people and find the ones who will be intellectually stimulated.  i think it might be how well they do with literature and reading. i've actually never been good at, because i get distracted by some things just sitting down and reading a lot of papers but i think there were some high school students who were really extraordinary from hsrp who came one year and we gave them some papers to introduce them and they read them and understood them and they're like dense papers, so, i think being able to cut through that and find what they needed, so like the ability to search for something and find it if you want.  connect your goal to what you've got and make connections like that i think is what it is. : yeah, i would also say that maybe that’s what creativity is like, or like if i was trying to achieve something you have the starting components and think forwards and backwards and make a bunch of connections and make a list and see which ones work and which ones are best. : i'm not always very successful.  i told you i am at the moment have a little bit of a disorganized mind but in general i try to really organize my thoughts and keep in mind what i need to and not worry about things that i need to.  and when i can do that that’s when i'm most successful. : yeah.  i would say that that is my strength and my weakness.  because sometimes i focus on the wrong thing and then i do it for ten hours straight and its not great, and yeah. : yeah. : um i know its gunna sound weird but i think i got some of it from playing board games, or i think board games are a good analogy for creativity.  i was actually thinking ahead to what creative process would be like and i think its best compared to a board game.   : i just thought of a really simple one and its like a puzzle game and the pieces are robots and they slide until they hit a wall.  they don’t have breaks.  and so you need to figure out a configuration to sliding them to get them to the right position and you can hit other robots to stop them as well, and so its like you visualize it with your mind and you think backwards from the place they need to go and forwards from the position of the robots and then you make connections that way.  : oh, no i didn’t think about my process at all until i knew id be talking about it. : yes.  i tend to think for a long time about things so i didn’t want to be blank slate for you and sit for a long time and think without talking. (camera beeps) : um yeah. : um, it depends. : interests and whether or not i use the information right away.  but i guess that’s obvious if you have spaced repetition that’s steady but if you have it ever so often you'll remember it.   : sometimes.  yeah.  what do you mean by absent minded specifically, like? : um, that my mind is in other places.  well usually my mind is trying to be in multiple places at once i suppose which maybe is good for making connections that are unusual or just connections at all.   : yeah : there aren't a lot of female students in our lab.  there's maybe one or two.  i think in general engineering has seen more men just because i guess that’s a trend in stem but : the best students though that i've mentored and worked with have all been female.  like those high school students that i've described, the ones that were really great, those were three girls from, well i think one was from michigan and the other two were from california and then cynthia, one of her students from the grand challenges program, she was actually from another field and she just learned completely unrelated stuff and did really well, it was great.  she's from i think molecular biology.  and she did go to work in the molecular biology lab which makes more sense, but i was very impressed by that.   : its just the ones that i've worked with.  its not a huge sample size, maybe like 8 or 10. : i think its ability to be interested, but, although its hard for me to deconvolute from what other people are thinking.  how much of it is motivation and how much of it is just intrinsic ability.  it seems like the ones that have done really well learned quickly about the field and were able to do well.  so, they impressed me in terms of learning quickly. : i'm not the best person to ask about that.  i don’t have much of a personal life, but i guess because of that maybe work a little harder than i did on that. : yeah.  i think most people started out as more sociable than i am coming in though so they might not have much of a problem either.  i guess if i had to give specific advice keep regular hours so that you know you'll do work between these times and then afterwards you'll go do something else. : it would be if i was successful at doing it.  i'm working on it.   : yeah. : um, like lab colleagues or just other peers? : oh yeah i have a younger brother. : he's 3 years younger. : i don’t know him well enough to say, but he plays marimba.  he does marimba arrangements of videogame music and posts them on youtube.  they're very nice. : oh marimba is a wooden xylophone basically. : yeah. : yeah, i think he's done with it more than i have.  i don’t, i've got stage fright so i haven performed much.  its kind of sad i learn and then i just play it for myself.  but, yeah.  i guess he also likes writing.  he's been writing novels recently. : novels. : for those i think he's still got some work to do.  i was just editing one last night. : yeah with me and my mom.  and my dad but he doesn’t read them.  i don’t think he does.   : um, i'm closer now than i was before.  i've become a lot closer with all of my family after leaving home because i don’t have to see them as much.  but i've never been really close with them or anyone i guess.  what normal people would consider close. : hopefully i can keep working on that. : um, i guess just brainstorming about problem solving.  i'd say it comes a lot from the context of whatever problem i'm thinking about.  that’s why i'm a little mystified by some of the creativity tasks where its like use this object in unusual ways because there isn't really a goal in mind.  so nope, no context.  its like in a vacuum, be creative.  which really threw me. : oh, you can use anything.  it's fine.  : yeah, i'd say some of these things that happen to me a little by chance like the things that are passing through my mind at the same time and i think about it and then it just clicks.  its not like i sat down and was like i'm going to think of something.  it just happened.  : yeah.  or like i remember i said before i do my best when i've focused on the right thing but i suppose not completely, so there's enough that i'm thinking of, things are kind of swirling around i guess. : um, i usually try to go to something that’s related that will build on the last one.  like we just finished work last year on characterization and property preprediction based on the compositional and structural characteristics of fly ash.   : fly ash.   : its from coal powered plants.  its just like ashes.  like the kind that would go in the atmosphere but they catch it in a precipitator so it doesn't pollute.  and you can use that as a replacement for cement, but you need to make some of it more reactive because some of its better and some of it is not.  so the work we did previously was about taking it and saying this will work or this won't work.  and the work were doing now is taking the ones that wont work and making them better.   : but then, i was just thinking about that and my advisor gave me this paper off hand and he was like this is interesting and then i read it and it was about specific ion effects, so like electrolytes and solution chemistry.  and then i kind of thought about that idea and there's some geological papers that show that ions accelerate to solutions of minerals so then using that to make the stuff more reactive just through solution because no ones going to pay do any processes on the solid so if you can just throw something in the mix solution and use it to cement that’s the easiest solution that most people go for.  so all of those things just kind of seemed right, but well see how it works out.  : um, in general or for research? : um, not, maybe briefly, i mean i meet with my advisor kind of frequently and he's really helpful in guiding me with what i should be doing (camera beeps), or if i get stuck.  so i don’t think i've ever had that problem thanks to him but : um, in my work and in my life, rationality all the way.  i mean its something i've contemplated trying to change or seeing if i can find a balance there as well because sometimes rationality is not necessarily optimal, but mostly, not with research but dealing with people trying to be more sociable.  people don’t talk rationally, so there's that. : well that’s what makes them so interesting.   : right?   : yeah.  i usually try, well sometimes i actively try not to make gut reaction decisions and just think through things pragmatically and overthink everything, which isn't great, but... : yes.  that’s what i've always done so i'm used to it, and i guess it works well enough for now. : sometimes.  not consistently. : most of the times for research have not happened while resting.  i actually generally have weekly presentations or reports with just incremental progress each week.  so usually in the end i think most people from my lab on thursday and thursday night are thinking about things, so.  i mean its good to regularly have that structure and think about things you've been doing. : um, sometimes.  sometimes i psych myself out and its not great knowing things coming up and i worry about it but when i don’t do that that’s good. : in like for what specific things? : or just any sketching or anything? : um, partially in my head.  writing stuff down does help organize things better though so i don’t like lose certain thoughts.   : or just like when i'm doing normal work? : either in my head or on paper.  i usually just kind of make a list of what needs to be done and i go through it and sometimes i skip some things which isn't the best but : how often... everyday.   : yeah. : yeah, for me its hard working out of context with no framework or no goal in mind so i usually need both ends to make connections.   : yeah. : i think i break up my routine pretty well already by being distracted.  sometimes it goes a little too far.  yeah i mean i've always tried to have a super regular routine.  one time i even like scheduled everything i would do but it never ever works out.  i strive really hard to be organized and i think if i didn’t i would be a crazy person.   : yeah.  one of the, recently yeah.  like we've been working through the project, the electrolyte solution project, and its been very long.  there's been some experiments that have not gone very well which is a little discouraging.   : some productivity usually sparks more productivity so like the downtime just like, like i'm out and just sitting there and there's no falling on it and at some point there's an avalanche, some of it falls and the rest of it, so there's like this i suppose.  my advisor says its every 16 months, but. so i've been with him like five years, that’s three cycles, i don’t know. : i'm not sure about the time frame but i trust him.  he seems to know everything, he's really perceptive and brilliant with work with people.  i walked by him on the street just getting dinner with people and he was like, "are you okay?"  cuz i wasn’t feeling very well.  i don’t know how he knew that, but yeah.  he's scary.  yeah. : during avalanche times or during down times? : maybe 12-14 hours versus like 8ish.  depending on if it’s a good day or a bad day.   : baking, origami, those have all kind of taken a hit since i've started research but i think its worth sacrificing them if i need to focus.   : oh yeah, some of them have been, i mean baking in particular, we use like a pizza mixer to mix the cement so its like baking but inedible.  and then maybe for just minor solutions to problems some of the things have kind of, for like polish or when we needed to hold a cloth on this, like oh an embroiderer would work great for that, so.  : none of them have come up in a major way because they're not super related, but i guess piano also gives me pretty good tying speed, i'm pretty sure that’s where it came from.  it makes me more efficient so that’s good.   : um, sometimes.   : i would say yes.  i suppose i need to sync how i feel about my productivity with that view.  even if i'm going through things and they're not working, even though no real progress has been made, there's generation, so in that sense i need to work on better quantifying my productivity.  like quantifying what is productive or not. : my work outside.  or both i think. : yeah, i've noticed that i'm more productive when i feel good, so. i feel good when i'm being productive so that’s a good thing. : i still don’t know.  i do somehow.  fortunately.  maybe just trying really hard.  when i started research actually it was like my other hobbies as a distraction because i wasn’t feeling so great, but. : yeah, i mean that’s obviously not the only reason, but it factors in.  : response to what?  anything in general? : probably more of a balance.  um... although i haven't thought about it in this context but in general i like with my rational approach have lots of experience trying and maybe succeeding at inhibiting certain things.  id say i'm a pretty inhibited person which might be why i'm not great socially. : i'm not sure how far it extends actually into other fields of my life but if i had to guess i'd day it does.  its more like a tool that i apply there and that i can apply other places too. : in some regards, yes.  i don’t know if people said it but i think so.  especially with eating. : yes.   : i think like to balance inhibition i'll be inhibited in some things in structure and some things like my work and then i go eat its like a break, i can eat whatever i want.  and without that i'm not sure the inhibition would work.                                                : um, sometimes.  (camera beeps) like with the things i focus on id say its pretty like you mean you do it and you cant stop then yes, very much.  my advisor was actually telling me, well i'm not sure, he thinks you have to be a little compulsive to be good at research because like obsessive compulsive disorder whatever, making sure things are exact and clean and doing things precisely, which apparently i'm good at... : um, nobody's ever suggested it.  i'm not sure if i do.  i mean i'd say if i was diagnosed with it i wouldn’t be surprised.  i've always had trouble paying attention in classes, like i doodle and stuff. : yes, lots of doodles.  my notebooks are more than 50% doodles. : i don’t have classes anymore.  i have more time now.  i think that’s the problem i've been dealing with, so there's less structure.   : um, yeah.  like i guess when i first started it i didn’t think or feel too much about it and then grew to like it.  i've settled into the period after that where i need to learn to like it long term, i suppose.  like with a relationship there's honeymoon period and then there's after that.  so i guess that’s something i'm struggling with right now.   : um, i guess we already went over creative process and what i think it is like.   : i'm just not sure its... i've just been wondering how similar it is to other people's creative process but i think if it were compared mine would rely more on the repetition and persistence aspect and execution of ideas and i guess maybe making connections, but i struggle with coming up with the goals.  or maybe i don’t struggle with it i just haven't done as much as i thought yet at this point in my life.   : or that's kind of related to what i said back at the beginning related to my advisor and like waking up.  not with regard to research but with regard to myself too.  and like setting goals rather than kind of going along with the current.  but yeah.   : i also think maybe for the outlet of the creativity i need to work on having it continue to turn out words and be doing the work for society or for other people.  i guess before i was kind of just doing it for myself so i could survive, but... : yeah.  i think maybe getting better about being sociable and working with other people is an essential component to that so i can understand people better because its something i really want to do but i think a lot and i'm kinda just in my own mind thinking about myself and how i relate to other people.  and i'd rather be less introspective as well.  not that i would want to lose track of how im doing, but yeah.   : i think that would be the major barrier to like most of the things i don’t do now. : probably would also help with coming up with goals and creativity in general.   : yeah. : that i've taken time to travel the world.   : spontaneous, curious, adventurous, positive, optimistic. : not being born an heiress.  um, hardest to overcome... i know of a couple of obstacles, um probably uh, letting go of one hundred percent control. : oh, it's very difficult.  its basically mind over matter just telling myself to just trust and go and it always works out. : my career? : well i grew up in the 80's so that was all about wall street, so that probably influenced my career, unfortunately. : because everyone was graduating from college and making six figures and back then in the 80's, a 22 year old making six figures was a big deal.  so, in the 80's, wall street is like the 2000's of the silicon valley so everyone was becoming uber rich and i equated money at that time to safety and security and accomplishment, so. : um, i find that i'm organized and i like helping others understand things so i like the mentorship role as well as being inspired by what they're doing, so what i do is i help small businesses get started or hit a new growth path or any kind of phase one thing which is scary, and exciting, and you know gray.  and i found i have that kind of mind that my formal training has allowed me to apply those desires to that.  its not fully stimulating, but it's close. : oh, creative accomplishments?  uh, i don’t think it's very important at all.  i didn’t hit my creative stride, thinking outside the box until much later, so i think that gave me the stability in my life to be uh grounded and centered and not worry about the basics and then once i get comfortable with that get comfortable to explore what you like to do and how to express yourself and all that kind of stuff.  but the 80's were very conservative, corporate, money, you know that kind of thing, not me all, actually. : oh, its travel, its doing something new, it's any kind of physical challenge.  um, meeting different types of people, different interactions with different cultures and understanding historically where we came from and why we have these beliefs today and that kind of thing.  that’s where i should have been during wall street. : uhh, don’t follow the current trend, follow what's in your heart, what you're passionate about whether it makes money or not because if you're passionate about it, money will come and it's not an issue and be happier.   : it started happening in my 30's.  so, that was 15 years ago.  goodness. : no, it was just gradually i think based on my own understanding of who i am and that kind of thing.  my own personal growth, so i don't think there was a trigger, no.  i mean i started really traveling in my 20s and that’s when i really started opening my eyes to what i loved, so. i think, you know what, its when i went to [country 1: where the participant went for business] for business.  i was living down there for about 6 months and i realized i was in my element here, this is where i belong.  not [country 1], but in that kind of expatriate, you know merging two cultures through business and kind of interacting that way and understanding, melding, that kind of that, ya it was cool.  so that’s what kind of opened my eyes to "oh my god, i should have listened to this one teacher in college."  : many broad social contacts.  absolutely a mentor is a must or you will take way too long to get to where you're supposed to be going, as proven. : um, colleagues to a certain extent because you don’t, i find that colleagues put their own worries and needs and wants onto others to make themselves feel better or to help them get to where they're going.  so its not, a colleague is good for the moment, for the time that you're in, but not for future endeavors.  does that make sense?   : if you think of people coming into your life in seasons, so some people - there's some corny thing about that goes around – some people are there for a moment, a season, or for life.  so, i think colleagues are there for the moment that you're in, so that time period, if you're working three years for that company or in that project, for that three years you're focused on that single goal which is not necessarily yours, it’s a group goal and a group goal doesn’t serve you individually, it serves the group, which is good, for the time. but, it doesn’t necessarily allow you to grow where you're supposed to be going.  so, that’s what i found.  there's nothing negative about it, it just serves its purpose for what its for.  some people confuse what's its for and that’s the problem.   : whether i did it early or late? : i think the importance of establishing your identity at any time is important.  so however long it takes you to get there to boost your confidence to get there, but its all about confidence and inner confidence. : explain intrinsic and extrinsic? : in accounting? : well, its important in the sense that people need to measure their activity, success, direction; they need to measure their performance.  other than that, um, what's more important is that they look outside of the box and take a leap and do something that’s important to them, so. (papers rustling) : nothing.  the only thing that motivates me, because i started my career around start ups, small/medium sized firms doing some sort of change.  what motivates me is that i have clients form all different types of industries so i learn what's going on.  i'm someone who likes to know a little about everything.  like put me three inches under the ground and let me learn an entire landscape.  i don’t have to delve too deep into things or a lot of things, there are some things that i delve really deep into, but, generally, i like to learn everything about everything.  i'm so curious that i'm like a sponge, and when someone starts telling me something and they're speaking from their heart - oh my god – they can talk to me for hours because they're so excited and passionate and they give you a perspective that’s interesting, so.   so, otherwise if i was working for corporate america, just one big company, i would be bored to tears.   : oh yeah, when i was working for [company 1: where the participant works], when i was working for one company, just caught in the will with no influence, no visibility to any feeling i had done had any kind of like impact.  impact and influence are very important to me.    :-chuckles- so, after i started working in [country 1] with this company to open up a business unit down there, i came back to the same job and the same boring once the project was over, i was expected to go back into my role and just be this piece of a machine and i said i can't do this anymore.  and i looked around and i said where can i, what other positions in this company would i like?  and it’s a huge company, an international conglomerate, a monster, top 50.  and i looked and i said, there's not one position here.  not one. and the one i did want, they were never leaving, there was no way.  they were the ones who opened up international markets.  and they weren't leaving.  they had the best job.  so i decided to leave and i told my boss i was leaving, i can't do this, i had no idea what i was going to do and they suggested that i stay on board as a contractor and that’s what kicked off my being a contractor for businesses, and word of mouth got out and i started helping small businesses and those owners started telling other entrepreneurs and it kind of just kicked off from there.  so it was because of [country 1] and then it was because this company, this one manager obviously liked what i did and valued what i did, and it brought me back as a contractor of very lucrative contracts, so that’s what made my transition into being an entrepreneur myself, so.  it was good, it was very fortunate.  oh, so i left because, well the trigger for why i left is because i had the opportunity to go to europe for two weeks and i just came back from [country 1] and i didn't have two weeks left on my vacation and i said i'm going anyway and they said if you go you're no longer working for us so i said ok and they were shocked.  and that’s when the conversation started, so yeah.  it's because they couldn't control it.  so that's what triggered it, travel triggered it.   : yeah, jump.  you just gotta jump sometimes. its pretty stupid because, yeah it’s pretty stupid.  coming from where i come from and people around me, they were like terrified for me.  and you know your worst enemy when it comes to change and following your dream are the ones closest to you because they're so frightened for you.  they want the best for you and they see you form their perspective and they, you know, they want to protect you.  and that’s the worst; that’s the worst thing that can happen.      : no, i'm stupid enough just to do it.  i'm spontaneous and both optimistic at the same time, probably carelessly optimistic, but i've always had this sense, you know even transitioning form high school to college, i've always had this sense that it will work out no matter what.  i'm supposed to do whatever i want to do and if i really want it, i'm supposed to be doing it, and i'm going to fall a little bit but it will just give me black and blues, and not going to break a bone, so.  that’s actually followed me through my whole life.  i was lucky at that.  i don’t know where that comes form, i must have a guardian angel whispering in my ear, "just do it!" but it doesn’t make me panic is the bad part.   : well, i don’t know, my friends think it's bad.  they still to this day think i'm living an unconventional life, which i think i'm so conventional, its like funny.  um, but to them, because they went to school, they got a job, they worked their way up.  now they're vp's, presidents, and ceos of these companies and all the boards and i'm just me, so, its kind of weird that way, but you know, its unconventional.  i'm sure they have big 401k's and tons of things like that.  i have little things, but then i say they have more toys that cost more so they are in more debt than i am.   : i'm partly doing what i'm supposed to be doing.  ya, i was never able to make the leap fully.  its unfortunate.  that’s what a mentor is for.  a mentor is there to guide you early and tell you, "follow this path and you'll get there."  so, never had one, but i try to pay it forward and help my nieces and nephews and their friends and whoever's interested in hearing my lame advice, and you know. : from my work?  no there's tons of people who have influenced and inspire me mostly because of what they're doing, not because of what i'm doing.  but the two, probably two of the strongest influences, unbeknownst to them i'm sure, and you know what, they were just blips, just like my college professor was a blip; it was a one semester class in... so i was a business major and it was a one semester class and all my lectures were about - i should have known – all my lectures were about international something in some sort of cultural archeological, cultural historical class, i cant even remember the name of it.  we did things like genealogies and traced the human path from known existence to the world and all that stuff; on how they migrated and that kind of thing.  that’s astounding, even to me today.  and um, she was going on a, i don’t know if it was a dig or some sort of exploration and she invited the class whoever wanted to go to go.  and i was so consumed by money at that time and lack there of, i put myself through school also like every dime, and i think i was 2,000 dollars in debt and that was like, oh my god, way over my head, and so i didn’t go.  but it's funny, to this day, that woman - if i would have gone – that would have changed my whole career, my whole path.  i think i would have followed my true north if i had did that.  and ya, it’s funny that one teacher, and goodness to her, i don’t even know her name - i could probably look it up -  but unbeknownst to her she planted a seed and that kind of like, you know.  and then this manager, she was a strong independent women, totally, you know, bad ass in her job, and i totally respected her and saw similarities in us, and when she brought me on as a contractor to help me transition, that was another pivotal, "oh, ok" so.  career wise, those two are probably the strongest influences that i still remember today.  but there are tons that i've talked to and they inspire and they don’t even know that they're doing it.  people inspire others and they don’t even know it; its amazing.  : no. : ya, she was the one who taught me how to manage people, manage up and manage down.  managing up is harder than managing down.  that is a skill worth learning.  took me a long time to learn that.  i still don’t do it very well because i am pretty straightforward; i speak my mind unfortunately.  but she tried to teach me diplomacy, holding onto your tongue.  she was very much the same as me.  she was very outspoken and i saw that get her in trouble in work a few times because she's such a strong person.  so i tried to emulate her.  she talked to me occasionally about that, about how to manage up, manage expectations and manage idiot personalities... that’s the worst.  yeah, idiots above you and they're just career people who are uninspired and their unintelligent with their jobs and they cant make change for the better because they're too afraid or they just don’t know how to do it and they do the same thing everyday over and over and you say, "oh you know what, if you make the wheel round instead of square it actually flows better"  they can't do it, they can't see it, and they wont try it.  then they blame you for event trying to upset the boat.  those kind of people.  she taught me how to manage those type of people.   : it is!  you're probably too young to encounter any of this but its amazing what's out there. : we didn’t really have deep discussions about much.  she wasn’t really a formal mentor; we just kinda ended up being colleagues who would... it was very much a mentorship where she made me feel like her equal rather than a peon, so we just kinda talked in general about things.   : yeah. : um, the bigger picture predominantly, and how they might fit in it and how they can maneuver in it.  i think we become myopic often and i do, i come in and out of this micro world often because you know you just get consumed with your own self and then... and that’s why travel is so important you just sit back and go, "oh, right.  i am a privileged person.  i live in, you know, peace and harmony compared to most.  i can turn a faucet and get clean water mostly.  and you know, blah blah blah."  so perspective and big picture... that’s what i usually – and try to, i try to tell them what i see in them, which is hard to see in yourself ever, unless you're really self aware, but nobody is, especially under 30.  um, and see, you know, try to tell them their traits and how it might relate to certain careers that they're interested in.  to try to bridge the gap.  or to – if i've known them a long time like my niece and nephews – what they are always good at, but now are leaning towards something else because that's where the crowds going.  reminding them what they're always good at, you know.  my niece is good at writing.  she stopped writing.  which is, oh my god she's a phenomenal writer, she stopped writing.  she's following this crowd going to business, she's trying to emulate me.  i'm like' "ugh, don't do it." and i tell her, what about business inspires you?  and all her answers were mine.  they were money and she wants to work in a big corporation.  she wants to get dressed up.  she wants to be able to buy nice things.  and i'm like "ugh, oh god you're being influenced by television."  here's what you're good at.  do business, but do it – business is …. everything's business, so remember what you're good at and what you love which is sports and writing and, she loves people, i mean she's a great people person, chatty cathy too.  so, she can do all that, but just try to remind her of her traits and how they might relate to a career rather than what's popular.  you know?  : yeah, pretty much.  almost instantly.   : almost within the first conversation, i can tell almost immediately if they're gonna be good or not.  always because of the why.  always.  always because of what they do in their off time and how it compares.  or if they won a million dollars, that question.  that’s where you see the true person.  once they get passed, "i'm gunna buy a mansion and a yacht," and that stupid stuff.  once you get passed that, what you're going to do two years later.  then what are you going to do?  that’s the true person.  that’s when you can tell if they're in synch with their career or not.   : um, one of my friends is an elementary school teacher and she's great with kids, perfect.  i asked her that a couple years ago and of course she would quit what she's doing because she hates her job.  she doesn’t hate her kids, she hates the bureaucracy above her.  she's like, its incredibly stupid.  she says she's just had it.  she's just gunna go off and not worry about it and maybe she'll teach english in a foreign land, or whatever.   and i'm like, oh ok, that sounds great.  and then when two years later when you're homesick – because it takes two years to be like, "oh my god i just want a real mcdonalds hamburger," or something stupid that you would never eat here, right?  then all of a sudden you're like craving it, like "i want cheetos,".  um, then she started talking about opening up a school of her own and doing all that.  thinking nonprofit.  it was a k-12 school.  she had a great idea.  and just by her talking about it, i knew she was an educator.  i mean, i knew that’s what she's meant to do, and work with people and kids.  so, i knew she was in synch.  and then the other ones are obvious, i mean when you have someone whose, i don’t know, whose another friend who hates what they're doing but they're very successful at.  oh, financial advisors.  i have a friend who's a financial advisor.  he's a big "marky mark"  i don’t even know what vp level he's at.  he's like, way up there.  another guys a vp at another electronics behemoth.  anyway, when they talk about their job and if they were doing anything else and then they'd talk about the lottery and the toys they would buy and everything.  and then they do something completely different, like they're going to go learn a musical instrument or something or live in france or something weird, not weird, that's not weird.  what's weird is they have no artistic outlet in what they're doing whatsoever, and they're not doing it in their offtime either.   : no, i mean you talk to them like why do you want to learn this instrument and they're like, you know way back when i used to play an instrument or i used to be in a band and i used to do this then i gave it all up to do this and then i had a family and then it just kind of piles on and they cant stop the train going because its too many responsibilities and so those two people are successful on the outside but on the inside they're not happy, so. -coughs- : no, my fields pretty generic.  unless you're talking about high corporate finances, is very male dominated.  for the most part, my field, women are considered able to do tedious number crunching because of their inability to do blah blah blah.... seriously.  a lot of men think that women enjoy the tedious and can do it better than men who have aspirations but have to do it because, you know. they think they're logical.  they think we like tedious.  that’s how they relate the two.  numbers and detail.  they think women are better at numbers, tedious, routine detail, is what women are better at.  men are better at logic.  i've had these conversations numerous times with my friends.  i'm like are you saying this to actually make me hit you, or you know.  you don't seriously believe this do you?  they're like no, lisa, listen.  so ya, its bizarre.   : um, i don’t know.  well, men are... well, in my career i think that both men and women... women are either doing accounting or finance because its a 9 – 5 job and they can create a balance between work and life or if you're doing high finance, you know, its pretty lucrative in the high levels and pretty prestigious and like they value pure recognition and awards in doing all the things executives do.. its that executive lifestyle that they like and crave, so.  yeah.  they're all very similar both male and female, i think, in that way.  men don’t do it for the balance of career and home.  i've never heard any of my guy friends that that.  but many of my female friends have said that.   : that’s probably it.  because women feel like they have to do everything.  you know they have to work and be responsible for raising the kids and making sure the kids get to all the activities they're schedules to get to and you know to be the sexy young wife, you know.  and so, men just feel the need to be the provider, you know, bring home the money.  and then, you know, kind of be the stable force.  so ya, they’ll help out with the kids when needed – and many of my friends do- that's not an issue, but they don’t see it as their job, they're waiting for their wife to tell them what their job is.  so the wife has to organize it and direct it and he's just the employee, you know.  if you're using the same knowledge of work.  and the men certainly don’t think they need to be young and sexy, i mean, my friends have certainly gotten out of shape while their wife is going to yoga and spin class and blah blah blah. : i think in your 20's you should not be balancing personal and professional.  i think you should be going full force into the career that you love and balance is unimportant because i think in your 20s you have a small window.  you have no fear, because you don't know the world, and you have rose colored glasses in your 20s.  this is what i find looking back now.  you know there's bad in the world, but you don’t think it pertains to you.  you don’t think there's death for you, you don't think you're gunna get old.  you don’t think anything.  you have all this energy and this ideal vision, whatever it is, and i think you should spend your 20s focused and doing just that.  and yes, you should be in relationships because of course you always need relationships, but you know, i don’t think people should be getting married early because it detracts form your path because you have to start thinking of more than yourself and really i think in your 20s your should be laser focused on learning who you are, learning what you love, and beginning to find that field and start doing it.  and then as you merge into your 30s, you’ve already got a sense of self that the rest of your career will follow.  until you build that base, that's why i think even if you don't know what you're doing right after high school you should go to a college if you can or some sort of training school and just get trained in something because as life gets going there's more and more things pulling you away from your true path so, your 20s is your window, its your only window.  so, after that, its very difficult to shift.  not that people don’t, lots of people do so after their kinda are raised, so in their 40s, that's their second burst that i find more women are doing, because they're usually the ones holding off.  so they're coming into their 50's with a whole new career.  so they're coming in kinda late and they don't have the energy they had in their 20s.  so yeah, what was the question? : yeah, so in your 20's there isn't any.... there shouldn’t be any balance.  it should just be follow your dreams.  because 20 year-olds are going to go out with their work friends or college friends, so there's going to be personal life.  there doesn’t need to be personal life.  i think there's times where lots of imbalance should happen.   : i think i was raised to be very independent and self- what's the word – like problem solving.  like i would do my own problem solving.  i was very... but then i grew up in the 70s when you just kicked your kid... you just kicked you kid out of the house and said don't come back until the street lights come on.  that was our life, you know.  we could actually roam the streets in a pack of kids and not be looked down upon and our parents weren't looked at as being abusive.  now they are... they told their kids to go out to play their being abusive, and ya just independence and relying on myself to figure out problems or something.  my bike chain fell off on the other side of the city; i had two options: i could call my parents and hear an earful about how i should just walk home or i can figure out how to fix the chain.  so you go to a gas station, you talk to the guys there, you ask "how do i fix this chain?", you get help and you figure it out.  : well i grew up mostly around in the neighborhoods where there was lots of kids so we played, you know, group games like kick the can and softball and kickball and foursquare that became sixteen square on the street and, i don't know, just group kids activities.  always outdoors, always... we did our own olympics at some point and you know, we just did things like that. : i have two younger brothers.  i have an older brother and an older sister, but they are much older than i am.   : 17 years.  there's a second marriage. : i grew up with two younger brothers, so i was the oldest, thank god, and i reigned supreme until they hit puberty and learned to run like hell, so yeah.  -both laugh- : um, no, not really.  well, creative is a funny word.  i don’t know.  by saying also creative youre saying, sounds like i'm creative, which i'm not, so yeah i don’t think any of us are real, or don’t pursue any real creative outlet. : nuh, uh. : no. : yeah. : well i think i was... this is where a mentor would come in handy. i think in my 30s i was, i had a bad break up at the end of my 20s, so i was really focused on career and stuff.  all of a sudden i woke up at 40 and i said, "oh my god!"  two of my friends got pregnant at 40, or 39, and i said, "oh shoot!  i wanna have two kids."  so basically, i wasn’t paying attention.   so yeah, that's how that happened.  chalk it out to just not paying attention.  especially living out here in california, you forget that you're getting older because everyone seems so much younger than the rest of the country, i mean if you've traveled everywhere, if you're not married by 30 in most places you're like, "what's wrong with whoever's trying to set you up."  but here, they're like "hell no, there's another person right around the corner".  so i wasn't even paying attention.  so that’s how that happened.   : where they come form? : my innate stubbornness to not be caught in the whale.  um, i don’t know.  i work when i wanna work and then if i wanna take a day off, which can be in the middle of the week or whenever, i just do it.  so it’s my own personal rebellion.  so if i take a thursday off i'm like, "oh, taking a thursday off, then ill take a friday off, then i'll work saturday and sunday.  it doesn't matter." so, yeah. i think it’s my own personal rebellions.  having control.  if i wake up one morning and say, "i'm just not working today," then that’s control, i guess.  so i don’t get rid of that control thing, so. : i am trying to be outdoors, yeah.  as much as possible.  so, i just go... and i work from home, which is, wooh, can be daunting, so i try to get out and mix and mingle with people and you know, call friends and do lunch and do dinner or happy hour and do something very social, so that where i balance back and forth the need to be social.  and i'm an introvert, so you know if i have the need to be social, its really too isolated, so.   : oh, i flip constantly.  i have multiple projects going simultaneously, so.  so, i do a piece, i do a section there, ill be very focused.  it can be for a few hours.  it can be for a few days and then ill just be like, nope not doing that for a while, then ill switch over here.  and i'm deadline oriented, so whoever is on fire gets my attention, so.  : in my work?  actually that's an interesting question.  you would think rationality.  for the most part rationality i guess.  but its funny.  intuition for management decisions, that’s i think more important than rationality.  i mean i live my whole life on intuition basically, if you think about it.   : i don’t like the methodical... i'm good at it, but i don’t like it, so.  but it has to be methodical because its accounting, so yeah.  but when i'm talking to the owners, that's all mostly intuition. : a useful idea for? : oh yeah, i think that’s true, very true. : i think so.  whenever there's a problem i cant solve, my brain compartmentalizes it i think.  and at any odd time ill have the answer.  so i think that its just churning in the background, like the computer that it is.  without even thinking about it.  ill think hard about it and wont come anywhere close to the answer, and then ill take a day or two off, and then all of a sudden ill either dream the answer... like ill wake up a lot.  if i'm working on a problem, like in the three to four am hour, ill have the answer.  it's bizarre.  you know, just a couple of days of being away from it and looking at it with fresh look almost gives me an answer... gives me an answer pretty quickly if i do that. : oh yeah, i always think about work.   : oh, i get a lot.  i'm a good sleeper.  i would say i usually fall asleep at 11ish and wake up around 6ish... that's around 7 hours, then i lounge around for a little bit before i get into my day.   : yeah, in the morning.  i am strongest until 3.  anywhere before 10 is my first run and anywhere before 3 is my next run and then after 3 im pretty useless. : i create lists.  i have a black book that all ill brainstorm and ill think of everything about that idea and ill put it in this book.  and then ill research a little bit.  and then different ideas pop up and it expands and all that stuff.  sometimes it goes in a completely different direction, but it starts with lists. : whenever it comes to me, again, i'll have a surge of interest.  and then i won’t pay attention to it for a while and then ill see something that'll remind me or spark an interest and be like, "oh, i need to do that for this," then ill go through it and do not as intense as the initial time, but another kind of go around of lists and research and kinda like scoping out an idea... i'll picture how something will work, so – in my head – and all the people involved, all the expertise i would need, how to manage it, how to structure it, how to market it. : both : mhm.  teams are great for certain things.  and working independently is great for certain things : um, i don’t take the lead in a team.  i usually am an observer and i may prompt participant other people to pull things from them, but i kind of churn the information around internally before i, you know, really interact with the team.  so, because i'm very interested in what other people's perspectives are.  maybe i don’t trust my own right away.   : oh, very important.  i cant do anything without the goal.  so, ill create little goals for me.  so, you know. : like? : no, i don't think so.   : yeah. -coughs- : um, i think its an outside influence, always.  ill read an article or read a book that completely unrelated.  ill talk to someone or meet someone or talk to them about something their doing.  its usually an external influence, yeah, so : i think that’s an exercise for sure.  i think you need to exercise your brain to be creative.  so first it’s a little difficult to think in various perspectives but you can train your brain to do that. and i think with more and more practice, you get better at it, you know.  having said that, at the same time you have to be aware that sometimes you just apply the same theories, which is not good, so, that’s where the team comes in, always giving you that outside perspective to reshift, to say that one word that goes like, "oh my god," then you have a whole other like line, if you're looking at a trail, a whole other line to explore and offshoots from that.  but yeah, i think you need to train your brain to be creative for sure.   : nuh, uh. : well, yes i do.  how many clients i have, how many hours i've worked, how much money i've brought in, but basically it, so.  how many hours a day on average i work. i take note when i'm starting to work 12-14 hours, i take note of that and ask why, what's going on. it’s usually because i was working four hours for weeks before that and i've, i don't know, deadlines coming up.  but sometimes its not.  sometimes its because its an interesting project and i'm just completely involved and excited about it.  and when you're inspired it doesn’t matter how many hours goes by.  it doesn’t even feel like it.  you know?  so that’s kind of cool. : um, usually there's a specific goal.  um, so if it’s a personal project then i know i'm done when i've created something or opened business for something or, you know, just kinda, it's finished, it's done, it's working now.  so, ya.  : i feel fewer.  i feel like i don’t really, because i'm simultaneously uninspired by what i do.  i feel like i do just enough, but i could be doing more if i was really into it.  like my company, people are like, lisa, why aren't you expanding this area?  i keep giving away certain stuff because i'm just not interested.  but other people who would be inspired, oh my god, by now they'd have this big conglomerate.  they'd probably have like 50 people working under them and they'd be in multiple cities and, i'm just, ugh.  yeah, so.   : how do i bring ideas to- like connect? : um... i mean do you mean like if there's a overload somewhere and try to create the... write down what the flow is and figure out where i can change the flow and where the problem is and stuff like that? : i kind of do, not a formal flow chart, but kind of.   i do lots of boxes and arrows.   : i think i'm good at seeing the bigger picture.   : and seeing an idea and the steps it would take to make that come to... and i think i do mostly in my head.  i've been told i was a good translator between the idea person and the manager if that makes any sense.  so, the manager is more like the guy, being generic person, who likes the routine and can do operations from day to day and do the same thing over and over and over.  and uh, the idea guy, again generic, is the one whose thinking of all these odd things.  um, not necessarily knowing how to apply them to real life, right.  so, i've been told i have the ability to translate what the idea guy is saying to the real life guy and saying this can work and we need to set it up this way, this way, and this way. this is what this guy is saying.  if we set it up this way, this way, and this way you can run it.  its like feasible and lucrative and you can do it.  cuz the manager guy can't really see what the idea guy is saying, i find.  because they're very limited in their self.  well, they have different skillset, let me put it that way.  their skill set is to manage and grow, not create.  and the idea person is to imagine.  sometimes create.  not necessarily create.  lots of idea people can't create things.  and i'm the person who can translate in between.   :  manage up, manage across, manage, down.  but its more than just management though.  its actually seeing the idea, formulating how it would work in today's world through technology, through social networking, through rules and regulations of the time, doing financing, how would you get financed, how would you make money out of it.  you know, all those kinds of things that create.  i can kind of work through how each section, you know, not always by myself.  i'm not saying i'm some genius, but i'm just saying at least ill balance it off other people that i know are good at certain areas and ill be able to say what if we do this, this, and this.  what would that look like to you?  they would say that would look perfect.  then they would take their idea and build it into the whole thing and that kind of thing.  its where the independent and the team thing comes in. : and see where things are heading and why things are heading that way.  sometimes the lead person is the one who shouldn’t be leading.  that is also being observed. : um, i can be very focused and if i'm doing something particularly mundane i can be easily distracted.  so, i am both.  i flip flop between both.  but mostly, i'm a pretty focused person, in spurts.  not in long.... i have long spurts, it can be days, it can be hours.  but i have long spurts of focused.  i have the ability to sit and focus and work.  um, i got another friend whose add, he does a lot, but doesn’t have that ability to sit and focus and through seeing friends like that i realize i have a skillset that i'm able to focus and churn, basically.  some people don’t.   : oh, goodness.  it depends.  i obtain ideas and abstracts very well.  specific details like names and like your name for instance, i think i finally locked in yesterday.  i'm like oh, [interviewer’s name], [interviewer’s name] right?  oh, [interviewer’s name], yeah.  its been a month we've been interacting and the name is just, swoosh.  so details, not so much.  so if someone is like, "how much did this person make last month?"  i have to go look it up.  even though i might have just done it just two days ago.  i should know it because i did an intensive analysis of it.  i'm like, i... its gone, completely.  : no. : they need to inhibit? : i think that makes sense absolutely.  i think that, because i know some really, again i don’t think i'm really creative, i know some really creative people.  um, and i'm stunned by them always.  um, ok, so i know two specifically.  so two people, one of them is like a brainstorm maniac.  he, you give him a problem and he, he actually goes down each chute and kind of explores why each of them would work.  so he has multiple answers.  so he's not inhibiting, he's actually kind of, i don’t know, looking at all the answers that come to mind, his mind, and exploring all of them and how they would work.  my other friend works on various planes simultaneously, that’s how he describes it too.  um, and he specifically looks for the most unique like, yeah.  he specifically looks for the most obscured, most unique like yeah. and the most interesting for him, because he likes to make it a challenge, so.  um, for me to inhibit, i think i'm more like the... i think i'm more like the first friend, steven, i think i'm more like him in the sense of, ill try to think of various ways something can work and explore each of them.  so, that's why i don't think i'm very creative.  although he's extremely creative.  he can pick up more ideas than i can, that's why.   : i am certainly not uninhibited.  um, yeah.  i'm very conservative and, i don't know, very predictable.  um, what was the other part of that question? : yeah, i'm probably more inhibited. : yes.   : no. : i don’t think there really is.   : i ruined your whole project!  the question that asked... hmmm.  um, did you ask how do i express myself creatively? : i mean i really don’t know, but i don't remember that question being asked. : i think you're just assuming people are creative or not creative but i don’t think you asked how i expressed creatively, so : i don't know. i don't think i'm creative at all, so.  but i know that has to be impossible because everyone's creative in some way. : oh, really? : exactly, so you did ask the question!   : yeah because some people are creative in the way they dress.  some people are creative in the way they speak or, um, kind of approach different things.  and then there's obviously observable talents that people have to be creative, but, yeah.  yeah, i certainly don’t see myself as creative at all.  and i have no observable talent and yeah, i think i'm a pretty rational, boring being, so yeah. : sure. : um, my phd in physics. -laughs- um... it really depends, right. so how specific do you want me to talk about it? : okay so maybe, um, from my background, um, being where i am today given that um, so coming from a middle-class family in [country 1] with nobody having higher education in my family, being here is a huge achievement for me. : ambition, um, and hard work. : um, having to come to a completely different country and live in a different culture and make my life here. : -laughs- brute force i would say.  : um... a particular event, let's see... there hasn't been a particular event, no. : like starting a phd? : i'd just say don't be afraid of like all the - we are – we and our society define false boundaries for ourselves. like a lot of those boundaries don't exist. like for instance, the whole thing about um, women not being sciency enough, like they can't do hard sciences are just random things that society and often ourselves inflict upon ourselves and they're not true. so just acknowledge them and move on. : oh social life is absolutely important. of course it depends on how introverted or extroverted of a person you are. but connections um, and networking is one of the main things um, to get success because we think - a lot of times we think we're alone in this together, but no matter how different we are from one another, we're still the same. and like just hearing other people's stories and the story of their struggles and how they overcame things is – you can learn from it. you probably can't replicate the exact same thing because most of the times that might not be applicable, but you can put all of those things together and use what is useful to you. : i would say later. like when you're young, you're like a sponge, you have to get as much as you can, and then decide which one you want to pursue professionally. : tying work to personal values... what kind of personal values are you asking? : so i'm actually very conflicted with this topic. i was thinking about it yesterday because i kinda feel like i have parallel lives. like i have a work life, i have like being active, i have a dance life, i have like something else, but they're all within me, so there's a certain amount i can separate them. so, i don't believe in boundaries in that sense per say.  : um...  so are you asking like why – can you repeat your question? : because there is a field that is just opening up and finally the technology has reached the point in which we can answer some of the questions that we have, but of course - suppose you have a single reality. you want to tackle it as - from as many different perspectives as you can, and of course, a physics perspective is just one aspect of it. neuroscience is another. perhaps philosophy is another. so we have to - we wanna get the bigger picture as much as we can, essentially. : yeah. : yeah! : both of them. : yeah. : so, um, i always loved the concept of space and time as a kid. so, i loved it in physics, um, i did kind of research in that area, but i hated it because it was too abstract for me. and at some point, i even tried to switch majors to humanities and study the philosophy of space and time in middle eastern traditions. i did research with that professor there. i got admission to that program. i did like all of the master's requirement coursework, but the professor i worked with passed away unfortunately. um, and there was no one else who was doing that research and around the same time the physics department hired my phd advisor, who was studying space from a neuroscience perspective. and i thought to myself, "hmm, i guess i could do this." and i started and then - i always liked brain and all that, but then, i think it is as if it all came together and i'm so glad i made that decision. : um, i am quite passionate about it.  : yeah. even though, to be honest, like getting a phd is a nightmare. -laughs- um, but i think i enjoyed it so much that that was enough for me to continue.  :  oh yeah, yes! : right before writing my thesis. that was one of the main times that i was like, oh i am done with this. like i am going out of academia, but then as i was writing my thesis, i was like, "i still can't let go. i like this!" -laughs- so yeah. i even started looking for jobs in industry to that point. : um, i think i was so tired and fed up before starting to write. and at that time things are – things are not clear enough to you. you're not sure if you can finish this on time, or if you can defend it successfully. so there is a lot of uncertainty and it's depleting. i think i was very exhausted at that time. that's why i wanted to quit. but then, as i said, like when i was writing my thesis, i realized that, you know, i like this.  : yes, there was a friend of mine and i think um, he played a major role in guiding me towards neuroscience. so, he was studying um, computer science, but like artificial intelligence, so he was using neuroscience for his research purposes and i think i kind of got into neuroscience from that angle too.  : um, he is very – he is very passionate about what he does too. um, very critical, but, very supporting which is - that's a very difficult balance to have. i actually try to do that to my um, students, my undergrads, the grad students that i'm mentoring, that you want to be tough on them, but at the same time, you want to acknowledge them. um, and hopefully they will learn to be the same way to you. not to take themselves for granted, like their achievements. at the same time, be self-critical as well, which is, i think, one of the major things to be a good person in general, not event to be a good scientist. you don't want to have such a huge ego that the world is rotating around you like and there is no way you're wrong. like that's - unfortunately that is what is happening in a lot of scientific fields that people think that this is it. this is their way and nothing else is correct, but that's um, toxic, i always say for science. yeah, self-criticism is good. not too much, but just a bit. : yes.  : well, there's the material that i'm supposed to be teaching. : i do it through examples, um - the challenges that i try to give them are kinda like - for example, how do i do this... for example, like i would always show them – i would have them struggle first. like even though a lot of times i know the answer to the questions or i don't know the codes that would do it for them, so i would send them to go um, figure those things out. so that's - i think that's the part that a lot of people, at least that's how i was. that i feel stupid, like why can't i figure this out. so, i let them struggle with that, and then once they come up with something, i tell them like this is pretty smart, this is like – this is a good way to do it. at the same time, i would give them the other way. so, um, hoping that they would learn how to look at things from multiple perspectives, like that kind of attitude. : it really depends. depends on how long i get to work with them and what situations i get to work with them. um, this might sound a little...sadistic, but like how they handle um, difficult situations, like that is one of the things to figure out whether somebody is going to stay or not. : that they're not giver uppers, and um, they shouldn't have like a defeatist attitude, basically. yet they can be sad for a short period of time, but not too sad. they can move on. -laughs- : hmm... : i think men in general are a lot more self-confident, and i think that that is something that everyone knows already.  : i am not good at that myself! -laughs- um, people - you shouldn't let one get sacrificed because of the other one. like i know this is cliché to say that you have to make sure you strike a balance, but even that balance i believe is different for different people. um, and i think as long as they find – that that's the thing, people should know themselves enough to know what's good for them and what's bad for them. for example, they should know that they have to take care of their health as the number one thing and then - yet they should know themselves. that's the number one advice that i have. : let me know if i am talking too much.  : um, the fact that they were just supportive, um, in the sense that – so neither of my parents have a college education. um, neither of them speak english. but, when for example, they saw that oh i am listening to english songs and trying to sing them along even though i had no idea what they were, they sent me to an english class. or when they found out i liked science, like i watched science shows, they would buy me science books. so, even though they themselves didn’t have those things, they provided me with those no matter what - as much as they could, obviously, but they did it.  : i, i read a lot. um, i played a lot of sports and... i think that is pretty much it, yeah. : i have a younger brother. : he is pretty – yeah, he learned dancing all by himself by just watching um, videos. dancing is forbidden back home. : um, so he watched videos and then he got to a point that he could choreograph – he started teaching ballroom dance and then he choreographed little things and he teaches underground, so. : definitely! : um, he's the most positive person ever and, again, he is very critical and supportive of me at the same time. and i know it’s coming from a good place like when it comes from him, so i don't - i take him seriously, basically. : um, ideas for work... i think from connecting the dots, perhaps? like let's say i, i watch some random videos online, like tech videos or like a course in a different field and i always think about how that might be applicable to my field sort of thing. like, for example, how i can use ideas from, i don't know, computer science to solve this problem that i have. and then like i also love collaborating and working with other people. i am not afraid of seeking help. so like, i would go talk with them to see if this is something feasible and if so, i would start working with them, something like that. : i'm not even sure if that's a conscious process. um, so like when i'm working on something, as if there is a flashback, oh maybe like i can use, i don’t know, that gear i saw in that video – there they were saying that the connections are faster because it's wired or something like that. so, it's like a flashback, yeah. : so, um... so like this is what i have been doing this since high school. like, for example, i am trying to – so then it was connecting the sciences. so, for example, i was studying for a chemistry olympiad in high school, and people hated chemistry because, "oh, we have to memorize all of these things." so i would always go and think about what is the physics behind it, because that is the more fundamental side and once i figure things out from a physics world, it would make more sense to me. and i did that in undergrad as well. or, for example, there when physics didn't make much sense to me, like i would look at the philosophy. for example, i took philosophy courses in undergrad. so i would go look at those connections if necessary, do some additional readings on them, that kind of stuff.  : i think i'm both. it really depends, yeah. : it depends on what kind of information. but, i think  in general, i have good memory. : um, i think that the emotional weight of the moment is really - like for example, when it comes to episodic memory for instance, if moments have emotional weight to them, i remember them too well. it's kind of excruciating at times. um, in terms of um, let's say like a paper or something scientific that i'm reading, it depends on like when i am reading it, how much i am connecting the dots. like if i find something to attach that knowledge to, it kind of stays.  : no. : no. -laughs- : i think both are equally important. um, and so this is the way i think about it, that a lot of times, there's a limit to how much rational you can get. so, this is like how i would um, come up with synonyms when it comes to words. rationality to me is more like brute force. you know this method, um, it's been shown to work – like on certain things – so you just implement it. but then, a lot of times that is bound to fail. and then that's when intuition will come to help that. okay like that didn't work, what else i can try? um, but then when you find something that you can try, you should stick with it. so you can't just jump from one idea to another. so again, you apply the rationality idea that you just came up with, and then if it fails – does it make sense? : yes. : exactly. yes. : or it could be, so basically, they have to be coupled. whenever you have a new idea, whenever you have an intuition, there has to be a rationality to back it up. because otherwise, ideas wouldn't go anywhere.  : yeah, yeah, yeah.  : um, i would say once or twice for each paper. -laughs- that's something difficult to quantify in my opinion. : when it is completed? : it really - that depends on other people that you're working with. um, cuz a lot of times you think that it is over, but other people don't think so, so you have to keep working on it. -laughs- : yes. : exactly, a group decision, yeah. : yeah so a lot of times i take leadership, like i like trouble, so i want to be in charge. but then, of course there's the principal investigator that makes a lot of decisions and in my old lab, um, my pi's motto was, "if it's not ready for nature, it's not good enough." so you had to work so hard to get it published in um, those high profile journals. and of course my days like that, the caliber of ideas and the work that you do has to be higher. that's why, for example, back then i would have parallel ideas that i developed, even though like maybe not all of them were novel, but just showing that you had multiple tiny good ideas, that was enough to have our papers published in good places. but, if i was the one making decisions, i would probably like chunk them up and then send those as two different papers to two journals. yeah, i prefer to have a quick reward faster, yeah, as opposed to getting one giant thing.  : yeah. : when its done no its just done. there's always things to do. so yeah i'm not even worried about that.-both laugh- : a lot of times yes unfortunately. yeah : yeah sometimes, some of my ideas- often times they fail but, i do get some ideas when i'm thinking before going to bed. i shouldn’t be doing that-both laugh- : i sleep a lot unfortunately. 8-9 hours. if i have deadlines that would decrease to like 6 or less.  : um, so i could have- a lot of times this is what happens. i will have one or two weeks of little sleep and then i overcompensate afterwards. for example last week, i pulled up an all nighter one night and then i would only get 6 hours or less but then i slacked off the entire weekend. i normally work during the weekends and yeah i would say one or two weeks a month that would happen.  : late at night yeah when it gets dark my brain blossoms-both laugh- : no : no : again that really depends on the group decisions.  interviewer: (31:21) and how important is having an objective goal to your work? do you have a clear idea in mind while you're working like a clear goal in mind while you're working?: i would say have multiple, multiple goals in mind, which is basically the parallel projects that i wanna do or i'm doing. but i try to keep them as nebulous as i can, because i don't want to get too attached to a hypothesis and try my best to prove that even though it's wrong. so i tell myself that i'm going to publish paper in this project, no matter what i find in that data, but that would be the goal for me.  : oh! i see what you mean. so i program a lot! so maybe you can  : i feel like you can think of that- thats my workbook. i have different chunks to it, and then i try different things, and if i don't like them i comment them out. so that's my- sorry about that! : so i have different- so let's say i have a folder for one project and another folder for one project and the folder for one project consists of all of the scripts that i write for example how- for example the experiments that you run those are pertaining in code right, and so i have a code that would just run the experiment for me. i would have another code that would go. and so i just start structuring it for example imagine this is my  computer screen. and then the first block of code would just be something that would just go- read the raw data for me. the second part would be what processes it a little bit. and then the next part is i go and start digging, trying to find in the data. so like i have- it is exactly like having a notebook, that each page if you may call it- does something different for me and either i like what it is doing for me and i keep it. or i don't like it and so i comment or take that code out. and then- i do that just as some sort of exploration of my data, and then once i have a clear idea of what i am going to put there and i go and refine it, like i make that into a final version that would just spit out the results that i want. it would make the figures for me and so on.  : or if i want to revisit it or do something else to that part i'll still have the code i won't have to rewrite everything.  : yeah. : deadlines.-both laugh-: it's good that i have deadlines so frequently. it's bad in a sense, but i'm kind of happy because it is a good driving force.-both laugh- : that also highly depends. i have had days with minimum 6 hours to maximums -when i pull all nighters it means i'm working constantly. so i have had like 20 hour days sometimes. if i feel like working, i would just go for it let's say. when i have that focus mode, i just don’t want to waste it. i will keep going. : not every night but i do like all nighters once a week, and then i’m getting like 6 hours :  so i have- still i do even though i work- one of the reasons i don't get enough sleep is because i don’t want to compromise the other things that i do. so i have a bunch of extracurricular activities that i do and i make sure that i do them. so even if, imagine that i know i have to-  imagine it's 8 o'clock at night and i'm working, and i know i have another 5 hours of work to do. i will still go to my dance class from 8 to 10 then come back and do those 5 hours of work. like is that what you mean how you break it? : well i have other things that are fixed in my routine, and i plan my sleep and work around those. : so i work out, i do tennis, yoga and lifting. i read at least half an hour or an hour before going to bed. i try to learn another language, and i play music. : i play two persian instruments, called the tar and setar, and then i play the keyboard as well. : i try not to think about work at all, which i think is useful because i need to take breaks from my work. then things will come to me all of the sudden. : are you saying that the more you produce the more creative you get? : prolific you get. : i think it depends. maybe with –– is that true at work? i guess with, in science maybe that's the case. but i haven't felt that in other things that i do.  : it doesn't work in music for sure. like there are periods that i compose songs very close to one another in time, but then i go through ideas of sheer drought. as if nothing comes to me. yeah it's definitely not like that in music. : no. : no. : i would think fewer, but i have this habit of looking down on myself. i think a lot of people do that. : i'm not sure. : i see what you mean. : i think that's also important. : i would like to think that i do that...um... but at the same time other people wouldn't think about it as the right way which is why i precisely don't care about whether other people think it's the right way. i just do it if i feel like it. : sometimes. : yeah. : what is that? : oh, like ocd, like obsessive compulsive disorder. am i compulsive...sometimes, yes. : i think i have the right amount of compulsiveness. : yeah i think that also helped me. : yes exactly. : i don't think i have adhd. i definitely have less attention span than a few years ago, it might be the smartphones and all that -laughs- but i used to be able to focus a lot longer for sure. : well, back then i had no idea what i was doing, i would do whatever i was told to. and then if i couldn't figure something out i'd feel like crap about myself that sort of thing. now i do listen to what other people have to say and i put that together with what i know, and see what ...and if i fail, not even if i fail it's a learning experience for me. i have changed a lot for sure. : define paradigm shift. : not the topic necessarily but the way i do it i think is differently and the way i approach it is different. so before i would aim for something and if i couldn't get it done i would, not get depressed, but i would feel like it's the end of the world. obviously that has changed over the years. : i think that the overall change was a theme of my life at the time. which i guess you can attribute to an overall experience that i was just growing up as a person and uh more you fail the more...is that the correct way? at one point i stopped looking at them as failures, even in my personal life. and that propagated into my professional life as well. and i started being less harsh on myself. that's it. : hmm...this might be something i don't know the answer to. what is the driving force behind wanting to be creative, to begin with. um yeah unfortunately i don't know that answer myself. for example, let me give an example, i am not a very good keyboard player. i am very slow at reading the notes, it takes me a long time. but i still compose pieces. um, and i can't figure out –– i think that it's coming from, i just want to express myself because i don't want to care about what other people think. i was saying, a lot of people think that you should go learn to play the piano and then start composing music if that makes sense. i think it's one form of expression for me, yeah.  : uh, getting through law school. : competitiveness.   : which was the hardest to overcome?  i – i haven't had any serious obstacles.  i mean i gotta say that compared to what other people have gone through, i don’t think i have any serious obstacles.   : um, going to [country 1] to teach english.  that changed a lot of things. : it opened up the world.  : largely through experience, oh and through meeting certain key people who stimulated those interests. : in a way.  i mean they were more friends than mentors.  i mean one in particular was a neighbor i had when i was living in [city 1].  he turned me onto bebop and jazz, but more than that it was this whole world that sort of goes along with it.  so that was very influential.  he was just a very smart guy who could talk about anything and i found what he had to say very interesting. : yeah, he was a neighbor upstairs and he had a friend living with him a musician and he had a long interesting history.  he had played saxophone with a lot of famous people.  he was part of [orchestra 1] for a while and he was involved in the [city 2] jazz scene and just his stories what he had to say was also very interesting.  : um, it just it opened up different directions and different areas that i didn’t even know were there that i, you know, followed up on with reading or talking to other people of what not and it just, you know, broadened the whole thing and opened up all sorts of areas.   : oh, um, like political history, you know musical history, lives of artists, places to go. yeah. i got to meet their friends and talk to them, you know, and they had similar things to relate so it was like a bit of a network that just expanded and like this network of ideas and experiences. : um, only if they want to be influenced.interviewe (4)r: uh, huh.  is it important for you to teach or mentor others?: no, but i, i mean, i would like to do that, you know if it was appropriate. if it was a good fit.  to be a mentor to someone, that would be great.  i'd like to be worthy of that.   : um, i would say get out there and travel, see as much as you can for yourself.  you know, read about these places and decide maybe its someplace you maybe want to see and go see it.  experience it, you know, for yourself, because it's never exactly what you expect. it's, you know, maybe better maybe worse, but it's never quite what you expect... you know, learn a language, you know try different jobs, you know, that’s what i did.  it seemed to work. : yeah, i think so.  yeah. : um, establishing your own identity, um, its, i guess it's never too late.  i guess i never had a - i always felt like i had my own unique identity.  that was never an issue for me.  but i, um, yeah it's never too late.  i mean if identity is a problem for you, if you feel like you don’t have your identity, i guess that’s something you need to work on, you know?  i'm not sure i would know how to help someone with that.  it seems to me that’s one of those things that will come to you when it needs to be there, you know? : um, well it's, i don’t know if it's important, but it's gratifying.  its, uh, i think it's, i guess it's important because you only have so many hours and days and years in your life, you know.  try and use it in a quality way.  if you're curious about things, if you want to learn about things, i think you have to get out there and taste it for yourself. : mostly because of enjoyment.  i don’t, i don’t, i really don’t feel like i have much of a sense of obligation or responsibility for anyone or anything because i didn’t ask to be here, you know, for one thing.  so that doesn’t come from a sense of obligation or responsibility, but it does come from like, i've got an inner need to be creative and to create because it's something that wants to come out, that’s gratifying and hopefully not just for me, hopefully other people can get something out of it as well, you know.  but its, we should share beauty.  its, i don’t think there's an obligation to do that, but that would be a great thing if we could all participate in that. : um, i can't do anything else.  i mean i couldn’t stop, i wouldn’t want to stop.   : yeah, i mean, like artwork, i've given it up for years completely and then have come back to like a whole different area of art.  like i never, uh, i was a painter.  i went to school for painting.  and i had done a lot of that and i just, i started traveling and doing all that sort of thing and i put art, visual arts aside.  i went to law school, i practiced as a lawyer for a while and when i came back to art, it was through writing, which i had never done before.  so, i came back, you know, in a totally different area.  but there was still, you know, that need to create.  but i was, i put it down for a while because i had other priorities and i just decided, well if i'm not gonna do art, i'm not gonna do it. it's kind of an all or nothing proposition.    : um, not really 'cause i've been wrong about that.  yeah, people i've i didn’t think would be able to stick with it have and others i thought had a lot of natural talent that were of course going to be successful at it, it just didn’t seem, for whatever reason, it didn’t seem to work out for them. : yeah, it's tougher for women because for whatever reason they get more criticism. things seem to be tougher for them.  like the expectation is that to do this you're supposed to be a guy, you know. it's unfair, but i mean i've seen that for myself.   : yeah, illustration. : yeah, it can be harder for the women it seems.  especially the better they are, like the harder it can be, ironically.   : um, don’t just eat, sleep, and live art. it'll work itself out. : um, they pretty much didn’t set up any expectations for me.  whatever it is you want to become whatever it is you want to do, you know, i had their blessing.  they didn’t say, well we want you to be this or go to medical school or we want you to do anything in particular.  they wanted me to develop something on my own and it was pretty clear early on that art was gonna be my thing so they supported it.  so, yeah that was of course very helpful. : um, i - with my nose in books or drawing or out in the woods with my friends just being wild.  you know, it was a lot different growing up then than it is now.  we didn’t have, you know, parental, you know, governance like hovering around us.  we were pretty much left to do whatever we wanted, you know.  so i don’t think kids have that any more.  doesn’t seem to be the case.  i spent like half my childhood in the woods climbing up trees and jumping off rocks and things like that.  yeah, so i don’t think kids grow up like that anymore. : yeah.  i've got a younger brother and a younger sister. : yeah somewhat. it's weird, i've gotten into video. i shoot video, mostly martial arts and action and special effects and that’s some of the free lancing that i do. and um, i have a degree in philosophy and a law degree, but my brother and sister both have film degrees and neither one of them are doing anything in film. : yeah, although my brother, he's uh, he's an electrician.  he's in the union.  he works for [opera 1], so i guess that’s... : she's a mom.  she's starting a - she's starting some kind of business.  i'm not sure exactly what it is.  i have to talk to her to find out what it is.   : um, i don’t know.  they just sort of fuse together and they - i don’t know where they come from.  they sort of self-generate. : oh yeah.  reading and looking at tons of pictures and studying art history and - yeah, the books i acquired.  yeah, just go through it all and absorb it somehow. : well, it's rare that i actually complete anything. -laughs-  um, just, it's it’s a wind that turns into like a groove, it's just like this seems the right avenue to explore.  i could blow this up into something bigger that might end up being pretty cool.  so, that’s usually what it is. : mmmm, no because i usually just go for it, but i build up this like mountain of ideas of stuff that i want to work on and i get started on something and run into a technical hurdle and i move on to something else, so - um i guess the difficult part is getting back to it and fully developing some of the ideas.  but actually deciding what to do is like, you know the next big idea, that’s the one i want to work on.  i just pretty much go with that. : i think so, yeah.  not always, but you have to be weary that too, but in general, yeah. : i couldn’t even employ that sort of approach. it just i, that would be alien to me.   : oh yeah, or even unrelated problems. : i mean ideas, influences, and concept come from every direction. : yeah, like that halfway point between being awake and being asleep.  that’s often a really productive time for coming up with ideas. : about seven to ten. i'm pretty good about sleep. : yeah, pretty much. : i don’t nap, i mean if i'm in bed and i go down, i'm down for a good, five, six, seven hours.  i try not to nap because then i get into trouble.  but, uh, no i sleep well, i sleep pretty solidly, and yeah anywhere between seven to ten hours and i'm good. : yeah, well it seems like ill have months where i don’t seem to need that much sleep and then it's like, kind of like a wave pattern.  trends. : late at night.   : yeah. : i uh, i've got a really, i've got a pretty rich fantasy life.  i can spit off tales and worlds, i mean literally i've done world building and i've even done programming to help me put together dictionaries and histories and landscapes, uhh, procedural world buildings.  so, it's something i'm very much into.   : its like, its yeah, its like that.  but the procedural thing is something like that a lot of games are starting to employ so they can have these very rich worlds that are developed.  so, i do some programming to help create these worlds and so they have this sort of internal logic to it.  once they have this logic behind the whole thing its easy to spin off new scenarios that sort of follow that logic. : yeah, yeah.   : well i wait until somethings developed then - i've got someone that i work with. we put the company together and yeah, we wait until its really developed before we unveil anything.  but this is a lot of stuff that’s sort of in the background behind it.  you know, maybe it's not apparent on the surface but this is what's going on, you know, behind the scenes. : its gotta look completed and its gotta have a certain polish on it so it looks like a really professional job, you know.  before we put it on a reel for example to try to attract clients, its gotta look really complete.   : yeah, you kinda know when you hit that point.  it starts to have a certain like shine to it. it's like, yeah, it looks like its full and complete. i don’t really have a whole ton of that, but there is some.   : well, both for different things.  working with a collaborator really helps push things along.  he's ambitious, so that pushes things along, but i mean, creativity, the way i see it or the way i do it pretty much a lone thing, you know, so someone else can add to it but the process itself, it's just in my own head. : well, um, i guess i'm more the technician, and i'm older than he is, so i know more stuff.  um, but he's more, uh, sort of plugged into the scene that were trying to get involved in, so.  one feeds off the other, i mean were equals, you know. it's not like i'm the mentor or anything like that. : yeah. : um, not that important.  i mean kind of - that becomes clearer as you get into it, as you see what's actually possible.  i don’t want to be, if i tried to be too methodical about it up front, i think that would lead to frustration as soon as you run into obstacles, like it takes away your flexibility. : um, not consciously. i mean things just happen.  you have to get up - i mean sometimes i'll sit there for 12 hours straight like at the computer and just work, you know. until something comes to break that up and it breaks it up, you know. i'm not the type that after 8 hours says, i need to get up and walk around.  someone will make me do that, you know, 'cause something has to be done, whatever.  we have to go to the store or whatever.  it isn't something i consciously or make myself do.   : um, not really.  its all, i mean it's often laid out like pretty clearly what it's supposed to be and what direction it's supposed to go and what it's supposed to achieve.  i mean that’s part of the creativity of itself.  i get this image, i know what it's supposed to achieve, i know what it's supposed to look like, i just have to get there.  to me, that seems it can be a lot of work and a lot of weaving in and out to get there., but i know what needs to be done.  i can see it on that shining hill right there.  i just have to get there. : uh, i used to and now - yeah i do sketch but i do it like in 3-d because i'm pretty good at 3-d sculpting.  and when i'm with my partner working on this stuff, now we've started to do a lot more like writing it out.   : yeah, so were like kind of both like literally on the same page so we both, so we don’t forget some of the finer details we want to put in there.   : i've always got ideas and i can always pull on, draw on something.  like some people get writer's block, i've never had that problem, never had that problem. : that ebbs and flows. it can be anywhere from like 80% is just work to just half.  i tend not to just pick at it for like an hour here or an hour there. i either do it or i don’t.   : that’s, uh, my art work is my hobby.   : i read a lot and i go online and do a lot of research on wikipedia.  i guess that’s a hobby.  just on any type of subject. : i guess i don’t understand exactly what that means. : well it seems like that’s a concrete way to measure how much they’ve achieved, how much they've produced.  i don’t know if that's an indication of creativity necessarily. : yeah. : i guess, i don’t think so, because to me it's so much in the mind it's not output, it's like the process, that you know resides in, you know, your head.  and picasso is kind of an extreme example.  you know he produced - you know he'd have a coffee cup and put like a splatter of oil paint on it and it's like another work of art, you know. i mean he was an accomplished artist, he really was.  when he was doing photo realistic paintings of people when he was 13. if he put that dash on a coffee cup with the oil paint, that’s damn well what he intended to do, you know.  he could prove it, you know.  but he's an exception, that was just an enormous output. in the guinness book of world records for outputs, so he's at the very top.  i'm an admirer of picasso, so i'm not disputing - but creativity, it's, to me it’s a mental thing, it’s a mental, like world, you know that you like put yourself in if you want to.   : less. : probably more. : oh, well that’s part of the whole process of creating is chipping away here, you know slimming away there, recoloring this, that’s just part of the whole process to me. : yeah. : yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. : i don’t, i don’t really. : yeah, not as the definition but definitely as part of the whole thing, yeah.  i mean it's hard to find what's creativity, you know, it's like defining what makes something funny, you know?  you know, it's really hard to pin that down. : sure, yeah, yeah, yeah. : um, i don’t know, i don’t know that i'm in control of it, you know.  maybe it's sort of in control of me.  i mean are you in control of your brain or is it in control of you? : well, yeah.  you know.  i mean you have a certain to an injury to a certain part of your brain and it affects your behavior and whether you can speak and what not, you know.  so, i mean, whose really in charge?  so, creativity, i mean these ideas and what not, i mean they just, they would just show up and be there whether i wanted them to be there or not. : yeah, i've got a really, really good memory for trivial and useless information. -laughs- you know, as you kinda saw when we were having lunch with that guy i can just pull this stuff out of my head. i can run into someone i haven't seen in a while and not remember their name but i can remember details about, you know, these airplanes from world war ii, you know.  i can't explain why that is, but yeah, really good memory for that sort of trivial sort of knowledge. : i'm kind of both. i can be very focused when i'm on task, but once i'm pulled away from that, i can be pulled like in any direction.  i find everything interesting so it can be easy to grab my attention with something shiny or fun, or, you know, or novel, or unusual. so yeah oddly kind of both but i definitely have focus when i need to or when i want to.  i can put everything else out of my mind and just focus on that task. : yes. : yes. : ok. : yeah, yeah it does.  you want to - it seems to me you want to do a lot of that.  you want to take convention and turn it on its head.  or i call it looking at everything sideways.  i think that’s a good way to describe it.  not take something and do the exact opposite just because you want to be different but sort of look at it askance and see if there's just a thoroughly new way you can look at something or combine it with something else or be skeptical of everything.  but then, understand what people's expectations are and mess with that. twist that upside down and turn that sideways.  that sort of thing. : yes.  yes.  i mean i don’t live that one in some extravagant like larger than life sort of way, but uh, in my mind with these ideas, yeah. it's uninhibited and just really take what seems to be given and say it's not so, it can be this, you know.  you can combine it in this way with something else and produce something new. : um, no.  no, not really. : maybe a little bit more that, yeah.  which are very different things.  i mean i can hold off from doing things that i shouldn’t do.  i don’t have much problem with that.  but i can get involved with something and stick with it for hours and hour and hours, you know, mostly because i feel like i'm making progress with it. : no, i've never actually been accused of that. : i spend more time on it in one sitting and i guess i pursue it more thoroughly than i used to. : uhh, paradigm shift. no i don't think so actually.  no, it's all been pretty much the same flavors since when i began, it's just gone off in different directions, but like an actual shift in what it's all about, um, no, not really. : ok. : um, lets see... ok, somehow it all gets back to sex.  which is, even in like the most trivial way, its somehow all related to that. um, and i'm not sure exactly why that is.   : like even like, uh, if you come up with something elaborate that’s mechanical like some future world. you might think how can that possibly have anything to do with sex?  but there's something about beauty, like especially like feminine beauty that’s like the ultimate goal of this and if this is something that leads as a stepping stone to that or something, you know, that would impress a beautiful girl right?  : right? its somehow, even very distantly, all somehow related to that. : it's like this warm feeling that comes from it, it's like this is why i want to pursue it because i want to keep on that vibe and keep going in that direction. : oh, you're welcome, thank you for listening. : i'm most proud of helping people, elderly people with alzheimer's and people with diabetes and stroke recovery. : yes. : volunteer. : i have compassion and caring and empathy. yes. and i have patience to handle peoples' struggles. : challenging\ : yeah, just dealing with a good friend or family member is dealing with difficulties, such as a stroke or diabetes and early stage alzheimer's. : yeah, personal connection is important 'cause i think you can really give more of yourself as a caregiver if you were connected to the person rather than just seeing them as a number. : yeah, i really am. : well i guess seeing elderly relatives such as an aunt or a grandmother that was living, trying to live on their own, trying to manage the best they can, and dealing with such things as a backache or early parkinson's disease. and also not being able to function as well as they could when they were younger, like when they were raising - helping with. - me and my siblings. when we were younger, and now they in turn need help, so that was a major contributing factor. : yeah. : starting out? i would give advice that you've received help and you were struggling when you were a child or maybe you were sick when you were younger and now it's your turn to return the favor and to help all the people that need to be helped. the camera shut off again. : yes, that’s how i did it.  : um yes. i've learned that after several years of doing it you, uh, become professional at it. you become more polished at it and people look to you as somebody who already has experience in that particular endeavor. and you gain credibility because once you help someone else, you know, word gets around that you helped someone else and somebody else wants - needs some help and - it's good for references. and yeah. : yeah mentors and peers are important, and the social contacts are important. but they have to be quality contacts. people who are positive, uplifting, upbeat, and supportive. because as a caregiver too you need support from others 'cause you don't want to wear yourself down. whereas this is very emotionally involving as physically, it's hard work, yeah, helping people. : yes, i know there are organizations and yes. i advise if you need support there are support groups for caregivers as well just in a community of other people who are also supporting, helping other people. : i would, yes : it's important to get involved because as our society gets older, yes, and many diseases are growing such as alzheimer's and cancer and strokes. it's important to get involved because we're becoming a nation and a world of people who are gonna need caregivers and especially when you — when i personally will get old, i would want somebody to help me, you know, so. : i enjoy it. i enjoy it. : both, yeah. i enjoy doing it. : just that i enjoy it, so that's - enjoyment. : i was been doing it ever since i was a teenager or even younger. as soon as i could help older people. maybe eight? seven or eight. as soon as i could help an elderly relative. and this continued from there off and on and then, yeah. : it's most of my time, yeah. major part of the week. : i like tutoring, i like teaching english 'cause i think it's a great language and i like helping people trying to learn a new language 'cause they show that they have interest in something new. and they have intellectual desire to prove themselves, yeah. : sometimes i do, sometimes i just private tutor, sometime i just volunteer. and yeah. also like a third thing i do is like helping tourists and being a tour guide. showing people [city 1] beach, the highlights of the city. helping them with directions 'cause i know the city pretty well, so i know where the best places to eat and best place to go see a movie and concert, yeah. : yeah, sometimes when the spouse can take over, yeah. : not needed as much or not needed as intensely, such as if they gonna move to go live with a relative in another state, then that pretty much settles. : case load, yeah. : not as heavy, yeah. : yeah external reasons or they have to go into a care facility full-time. : no. it hasn't waned. : their diabetes comes under control, they can get used to taking insulin then i'm not needed as much as when they first, yeah.  : no, not directly, but the great people like margaret mead, she studied different cultures. i value her philosophy. i like her. : yeah, she's a historical figure, a sociologist. she was a very famous anthropologist. i like jane goodall, worked with animals in jungles and these people have good sense of a care for this earth. i appreciate them and gary null, you know. : just hearing them on the radio and then reading about them in magazines and books.  : they influenced with giving me interest in travel and interest in different cultures and interested in the environment, like saving the whales and not polluting the air and clean water being important.  : i guess specifically there was a lady, i'm not recalling her name, but she wrote a book called "river of grass" about saving the florida everglades because she devoted her life to it and she wrote to representative claude pepper and she became active - even though she was in her eighties or nineties, she wrote a book saying we have to save the everglades and protect the wildlife that lives there, the storks, pelicans, yeah, and not drain all the water out of the everglades, 'cause that's a home to those many creatures. alligators and bobcats and florida panthers and key deer. and she said that if we drained everything up the environment would totally change and there would be less rain and less fresh water for people to drink.  : yes, it is. yeah. : i just tell stories like i told you - the things that i've learned. people who have made a difference, like ralph nader made difference in highway safety. yeah. : i think you can just judge them by what type of personality they have. if they're selfish or if they're selfless and giving to their personality. : the key things. yeah. do they always talk about themselves or are they interested in other people and others. are they interested in you and what you're doing too? do they have patience or do they wanna rush and get everything? is their only goal just getting money and getting material? are they also interested in helping people? and do they enjoy life, do they enjoy doing things, and having fun? going, you know, to like culture and arts, dance, music. : yeah. empathy, yes. you have to use both sides of your brain, not just analyzing. you have to use both parts of your brain and have strong emotional bonds. i think the arts connect to you emotionally too. : yeah, i used to do a lot of painting, a lot of sculpture, pottery, yeah. i like the arts.  : no. i mean i used to think that women were more giving just by their upbringing, but i think the gap is closing and men are able to be caregivers and women are able to be non-caregivers. they are able to be other types of fields like construction workers, military work personnel. : no, i have not. no difference. : yeah, it's important not to get too wrapped up in your person you're caregiving because you really cannot control somebody; you can only just give them advice... otherwise you'll become frustrated that they're not making the rapid progress you think they should be making. everybody works at their own pace and their own ability, and if they have arthritis and you try to make them walk a lot it could really make the condition worse. so, you have to do the best you can. : well they introduced me to my elderly relatives at an early age. they were single and disabled, hard of hearing, difficulty walking. so, i was introduced to all different types of people, not just my own age group. : with my relatives and elderly siblings, just neighborhood children on the same street. : stickball, punch-ball : games, yeah. hide and seek. : well they made emphasis on being physically active and eating well and not eating a lot of junk food, candies and all that.  : i guess so. one works in advertising, another one studied law but she's home schooling, so she's creative. i guess they're all creative. : gandhi and martin luther king.  : the product is you have to have your own support group, because a lot of times we get frustrated and you have to turn to your friends and relatives for advice who tend to know what's going on. and also the friends and relatives of the person you're caring for also, like their spouse. : yes. like "i'm having difficulty with this, has he or she ever behaved that way before? what should i do? should i just back off?" : umm i can't say. everyone's individual, it depends on the person. : yeah, yeah. relatives get pretty helpful. 'cause they're burdened too. -laughs- i don't know what to do either.  : i think you have to balance both of them. yeah. you have to use your brain. : yeah, you always have to trust your instincts, because you don't know if there's gonna be a car coming or if they're in a wheelchair you gotta be careful if it's a - don’t take a busy street and just don't go anywhere unsafe. if you feel unsafe taking them on a bus or something, you get off the bus, you go on another bus, or if you feel that they can't make it up the steps, you decide to - not to go, take the elevator instead or whatever. you have to get a feel for their looking - being unstable and wobbly, you get a hunch they could easily fall backwards, you know? : you mean this particular field or? : i can't say i did, yeah. : no i can’t say i do either. no. : i try to get at least 8 hours of sleep because yeah.  : during the day.  : yeah.  : both. i'd say both. : all roles. : a leader and a follower. collaborate. : just brainstorming. : yeah, i have a goal. a generalized goal.  : yes, exactly.  : no, i put things down on a calendar now. i write things down so i get focused for what's coming up and as soon as i know a project's coming up i put it on the calendar so that i keep in mind what i'm working towards. yeah, a specific date, time that i need to complete it. : yeah. my phone, my google calendar, and email reminders. yeah. -coughs- i think it's important to keep the emails, like if the message or email to reply to it or keep drafts and re-send it to yourself so it's always on your mind.  : not really.  : i try to balance 8 hours of sleep, 8 hours of work, and 8 hours of time for myself. pleasure and eating, going to movies, listening to music, traveling, studying myself.  : yes. music, art, museums, theater. : yeah.  : yeah. i take frequent breaks.  : i could also counteract with like steve jobs. i don’t think he produced a lot, but he just came up with his ideas and, i mean he thought about it a lot while in college, but he didn't actually build a computer before he thought of the apple computer so, his were just spontaneous creativity. and grandma moses, the painter, she didn't start painting till she was late eighties, so she really didn't have anything before that. and then there a lot of actors like ruth gordon, she didn't start till she was eighty so, yeah. : um, no. i try not to quantify it.  : yeah, i try not to. : i go for quality rather than quantity. : that's the thing. you have to know when to stop. yeah. so you don't wanna overdo the painting too much. you get a general feel for - like when i painted a mural of - well i paint murals, and i painted a big sign. i actually knew when to stop, like i made a sign for professional use for uh, it was for a beach of sports, i think in miami beach, and i made a big sign, like i think it's twelve feet by six feet or five feet and i knew when to stop. and then i draw. i can do cartoons, and so you know when to stop. i don't know, it just has to be intuitive, you cannot say this is - stop. it looks good. or you ask somebody's opinion, "what do you think?" and then if it's good - it's like when cooking. i like cooking too, so you have to know when to put enough seasoning, you don't want to put too much pepper or too much salt, too much vinegar. you have to balance, you know, the sweet and sour. : sometimes i wish - yeah. i -inaudible, 25:18- less. i spend less time. i'd like to spend more time. if i had more time in the day i would probably spend more time, specifically with art and painting and drawing. because i'm busy, busy with the caregiving and other things.  : i spend just the right amount of time. so, in case i can just - right now i'm thinking about getting a sketch book and taking it with me while i'm caregiving. : yeah. i can do that. : just from what i see, what i read. now i'm starting to like those magazines. just like getting news magazines and things that introduce new things and just with all the creative people, like actors and actresses, and i'm getting a lot of ideas from that. like new inventions, new advances in the health field, natural medicine, all these things are just coming together. physical activity, bodybuilding and all stuff like that - exercise. even fashion magazines, what people are wearing, gq magazine. : perusing, yeah. like in a supermarket when you're in the checkout line i see a lot of magazines and i try to page through them. : yeah. popular science. national geographic always has interesting articles. even travel magazines like condé nast. they show you pictures of italy, florence and all the architecture there. that's nice to look at.  : yeah, i like visual cues i'm visually attracted to. visual cues, shapes, colors, designs, quality. : i think i'm both. yeah.  : yeah. i retain them.  : no. not really. : that's right. yeah. : yeah. think outside the box. you need to learn. just think outside the box. i was thinking the other day, why do we eat what we do for breakfast? what makes it that you only eat cereal at a certain time of day? pancakes, that's just old convention, it's just ridiculous that we ask for products for a certain meal. 'cause i read in the 1200s or something, they didn't eat like that. they would eat like meat for breakfast, and the women would eat pastries but the men would only eat high protein, yeah. they wouldn't eat rolls.  : yeah. i would say uninhibited more but i'm starting to learn how to inhibit the conventions. yeah. conventions become programmed by society.  : i guess sometimes, not a lot.  : not a lot. no. : no.  : the change is - the experience is the best teacher. it's like, i guess raising a child. once you have the first child, you're kind of more secure in what you should do. yeah. : i guess it's less intense because you become more familiar.  : yeah. less challenging. it's more of a routine. : yeah. i guess it becomes less exciting and more dull. yeah. : yeah. i might transition more into the artistic fields. yeah. i might bring the sketch pad with me. : i told you everything. : you asked every great question. really. -laughs- : yeah. excellent.  : forging a career as a musician and also being married. : tenacity, perseverance and in the end i suppose, an intrinsic motivation of some sort. you can also call to it or refer to it as loving what you do you know. no matter what happens you're  intrigued by it your animated by it. informed by it to a degree.  : me : yeah. you know you have to learn how to get out of your way. you have to learn to be in the flow, in the moment a little more. trust it. and i think everybody has to learn consistency in doing those things and pursuing whatever it is that you do. that's a very important thing, that continuity.  : i probably, you know setting the bite sized goals. that's really the key because other than that it's going to be i imagine overwhelming you know. it's just a sea of things that you have to check off and you don’t know where to begin you just have to narrow it down to one point that's pretty close to where you’re at and then you start to use those things that your building successively as a bridge. i imagine and somehow you find that it's not going to be a straight and linear and lovely path, it might meander, it might hit a few dead ends but that's what you have to do, i think its just little by little, you know.   : no. i don't think there is one specific event or a watershed moment. there was probably a moment where i thought you know i should play music. you know right about the time when i was 19 actually that's when i stated to play which is later than a lot of people do. once i got into it that was it. you know, again it's being in that flow and recognizing things and not resisting and enjoying as you go along.  : yeah i suppose the advice in - if your starting out, is to start. beginning is one of the highest hurdles. : massively. : oh sure. going from just trying to get together absolutely basic rudiments in a bedroom to you know playing on stages all over the world. to get there along the way, again there is these stages that one encounters and you have to be a part of to get to the next stage. i don't mean stages like physical stages but plateaus. and you know, i have to say that my perspective changes somewhat all the time, you know, there is something new that will refine your perspective all the time and it doesn’t have to be anything earth shattering you know sometimes finer discriminations can be very enlightening when you encounter them. you know because what's happened i think over time one develops critical mass in what one does. and where as when your starting in the beginning, there is really no beginning, middle or end it's just a beginning. so it's hard to have much perspective at all and then as you're gaining this perspective over time you know you start to develop the hindsight and you're going up this mountain and at some point you have no idea quite how tall it is. and then say your halfway up the mountain and you can look up and you can look down and you still don't know how tall it is. and then as you go a little father now you start to look back and say oh i have covered significant area and ground. and then you know as they say you know the closer you get to peaks the more difficult it is to manage the errors are more rarefied, the slope is a little more pronounced. you know the angle of the slope and you know metaphorically speaking   : but i think that's usually the thing too to look out for. you can hit walls when you're creating things or accruing knowledge and skills that's- and it seems like you’re never going to get past it and then all of a sudden there is that "aha" moment and your beyond it where certain things become so very evident where before you couldn't figure it out at all. you know it's nice. you can go forward, you know feel free, more free rather than focused to try to get beyond. : you mean in general? i think for many reasons and it probably varies for a lot of people. some of what i tell you is important to me some i would assume is important to people if they’re open and sympathetic to it. you know i believe music covers the spectrum of existence and you know scientifically it's amplitude, modulation and frequency, all these things that are easily quantifiable but they're used and consumed in a way that you can't quite quantify and you can't identify. the objective and the subjective meld together for the person playing the music and the person experiencing someone playing the music. you know in whatever form whether it's recorded form or if someone is at a live concert. there's a lot you know the first thing you have in your life is rhythm you know when you’re in utero, there's that heartbeat somewhere that's mom and that's the thing that's informing you then that everything is ok, there's a consistency, a continuity in this very new limited existence. that's the thing that's telling you this heartbeat. you’re good, everything's good. you know and if there is too much fluctuation of course that's not going to be good necessarily. in life, you know you get into a rhythm, there is a rhythm in doing things and experiencing things that's one of the reasons we are no longer hunter, gatherers. there is a particular rhythm to have what people have in their life. and that's greatly disrupted anytime you move even if you have very few material things to move. that rhythm is gone. you know there is a rhythm to everything. people if they would pay attention have a rhythm to brushing their teeth. and it's unique to that individual. everything is life, you know there is expression, and in music on its own a language that often times - well there's syntax, there's a musical element to it. it's rhythmic and melodic and all of these things coalesce to paint a picture and to communicate something or to represent something. i also believe people who are involved in music tend to be more positive. overwhelmingly the people i have encountered in their lives, people who enjoy music are generally more positive. i believe, as we were talking about earlier slightly, most data at least strongly suggest that people you know the connectivity and the firing in the brain is greatly enhanced in wonderful ways. and we are probably… we’re just still trying to figure that one out. i'm sure. but to me everything is better with music.  : and owing that its appropriate to whatever mood or whatever is happening around it. and cultures are that way too. you know like in india there are ragas, there are morning ragas, evening ragas, afternoon because things sound different in the day. you know and you can hear and experience things musically, or sonically, orally, in a very different way just being in the same place at a different time of day. all of a sudden the same thing that was good around dinner time, is now very loud around 9 or 10 o clock at night. much less noise around you in the world and also in the morning things are different. they’re more clear. and then all of a sudden there is this rush. if you listen in the distance you'll hear people on the streets, you'll hear the hum of the cars and the tires but all of this sound and it's music. you know music is just this organized representation of life you know and that's my answer.  : yeah. they are points you know sometimes there is a greater frustration, your orbit becomes wider to certain goals whether that's becoming a more proficient musician or a musician who is actively involved in creating maintaining a career, a career that would be like any career where you have co workers people that you work with people that you reach out to. for more work for more opportunities, for more knowledge, you know and sometimes as we in the creative field say real life will intrude upon these things.  : you can't be in your cave to just zone out, meditate or focus on your music or whatever your craft is. you know so yeah there has been definitely periods where the ebb, there has been an ebb to the flow. : countless. some people have informed me what not to do. i just look at where they're at and i look at what happened to them or what had not happened to them. you know their path, their way, their approach wasn't positive and didn’t end up with positive results so that's something i lock away and there are many other people as well, they're like a fountain of knowledge. i have a few mentors as players and even to say to steer me a little bit career wise, what to look for and what not. you can't know everything even the people in the top tier, they're constantly refining what is good for them. what is good for them is changing you know at all points. :  i think that they are available you know to me at least and they're open and sympathetic. i don't believe they have any other motive in sharing certain things with me other than they want the best for me you know, and they would probably want that for anybody. i gathered over time that not everybody will get mentors or a lot of mentors. people have to recognize something within you and it's generally from what you do? it's your output, it's how you carry yourself, what your involved in, it’s a slippery slope. it's sort of like trying to get a job when you haven't had a job. do you have experience? no. well i can't hire you till you have experience. you can't just run up to someone and say i want you to show me everything about playing music and playing a guitar.  they’ll look at you and they’ll assess are you ready for certain stages? certain steps? you know and if they think you are and there is a greater personal connection of some sort then yeah that will probably happen. maybe they will look at you and say. i get it. i love the enthusiasm but at least i am not ready to tell you what i know.  : you know. yeah. i hate to reduce it to this but you have to just keep bumping around until you find the path and the portal that will let you go forward even if it's very little bit. which it generally is what it is and you should probably be ready to get quite a lot out of very little. it's not, i'm sure there is exceptions and i have heard of some exceptions but it's not like people are just you know straight out of whatever you know immediate environment whether it's where they live they or what city they're in and they just get spilled out on to you know the grammys, that just doesn't happen. and that might not even be a goal of some people. but just to be able to be more creative, be more proficient, have more skillsets, ability that you develop, i don't know.  : as far as people who are just starting out?  : that's - it's difficult. and again, you typically, whether somebody is a veteran or someone is new, it really doesn't matter so much.  and the thing that i have encountered is it doesn't matter how long you have played- temporally in calendar months and years how long have you been playing, it's how much you have been playing with that time and when people appear in your life at least as a musician it's, for an endeavor that has so many shades and subtleties to it. we all know, you can figure it out from the first note that person can really play they have something that's special. this person, you know talking in extremes, this person not so much and there are many people in between. wonderful player, really good stuff, lot of fun to play with, and again then there are those at the other end of the spectrum that are just fantastic. you know either are, i would say there are well i don't want to get into that ratio but- :  no, i don't see differences. the only difference i see overall is you know its truly as musicians, is truly for what i have encountered is pop musicians. you know symphonies are going to be a little different. but pop musicians, you know jazz, blues, pop music, country music, more popular forms of music is overwhelmingly men.  :  so let’s say the gross number itself, you know the overall cohort is much more populated by men then it is women. but it doesn’t matter if your a man or women, there are plenty of people i know that i could call right now and their wonderful amazing musicians and if you heard them play you would have to see them if they were a man or a women. clearly if it was a vocal you would know. but still there are plenty of, it doesn't matter. as we say, if you play you play. :  it doesn't matter, get up on stage if you can play.  :  forget the personal life.  : go for the professional as long as you can and in my case you'll find the balance when you need to find the balance.  : you know and one of the reasons i am saying that is you have a limited amount of time. i just for me, being the way that i approach things i just went full on once i got into it as much as i could even though i wasn't doing much at first other than trying to suffer through the basics. but you only really have a limited time mostly you know, to be a contributor in the business because of age, because of appearance, because of all kinds of things. that's changing now, the music industry has been blown apart since say 99 or so with digital disruption and the greater economics of. it's very appropriate to say the economics of the business has gone through a black hole and the physics of that nobody quite understands yet what, what the results going to be. but one of the results is the traditional gatekeepers are no longer there so people i say in their thirties, they can have careers that are just starting as far as the recognition and playing say to a thousand seat arena under your own name where as before you could almost never do that because a record company which the gatekeeper, in effect they were the greater gatekeeper they were going to sign people in their teens and their early twenties and that was it. it either hit then and they weren't to be developed or it went away and we just get new kids, new kids, which is interesting you know because in country music for instance i like to say everybody is 15 years old or twenty pounds heavier. it doesn't matter you know because it's more about the music then the show though there are plenty of artists out there who are known for very elaborate live shows that go beyond just playing music. but what i would say just getting back to your question, is go for it as much as you can, you'll figure it out, and i think to some degree, you should be not beholden to somebody else and to be responsible for them, you need to focus on this thing you know. i am lucky my wife is a novelist and she completely gets it and we'll tell each other, cave, ok, and the other one does whatever they do and you just don't let real world things infringe upon them for that six hours or five hours or whatever it is. not everybody gets that. you know, you marry someone who's or you get involved with someone who's not creative or just as bad i think somebody who's in the swim of creative but they're not really pursuing it you know whole heartedly and with everything that they have. that can really weigh the effort down you know and that again, do everything that you can, go for it, when you need something, you'll find it as far as a personal relationship. don’t be, i wouldn't say cut yourself off, i wouldn't say don’t be personable, you'll learn plenty as you encounter people of course everybody does by doing things in the world but you know if this is the learning annex my advice is do everything you can for your art and your craft first. don't get married and have a kid, that's not usually the path. but if you feel you can handle it, do it. you know but i generally think from my experience from what i have gleaned from others is its better to fly solo as long as you can and then find an airport to land in with more planes so to speak.  : just to give a complete, and as they say a honest effort in what your doing. make sure that you can monetize and subsidize, monetize what you’re doing to subsidize your life. and i think in a broad stroke that's it. certainly to believe in yourself and what your doing and to have the confidence to try it, to fail, to get back up and to keep going because i think that's what anyone does in any walk of life. it could be a little more difficult in the creative arts because its not always something that's easily monetized its something that's more difficult. you know if you’re a sculptor, there are only 40 positions in the billboard top 40 but how many sculptors do you think we need? i mean sculptors would tell you many but if you're in that business or if you’re a poet, that’s a harder to row to hoe for sure if your going to try to make a living at it. so its- :  yeah. absolutely. the entire family was very much working class and you know working class but i think progressive, certainly for their backgrounds where they came from. they were children of immigrants you know, immigrants who barely spoke the language at all when they got here and you know these things and well more specifically to family. you know yeah that's what it was, you wanted to do something that you can be proud of and to be proud of it means that your trying and that your actually making some headway that’s significant enough to where you can take care of yourself. you know there is a lot of people i know, they are tremendous musicians and one day, i don't know when i can catch up to them. but they are never going to make a dime and i have already hit certain things and done certain things and i know that they are never going to do it. it's a different kind of thing to have ability and aptitude in arts and it's another thing to make a career out of it. you know, i am sure there is plenty of drummers out there who would be wonderful attorneys, but they never tried, they never walked that path. yet they have aptitude for it and it's pretty wild when you start to think about who does what and why and how it works out and some people do very well and become famous. that's not necessarily a goal but i am just saying fame normally has some direct positive correlation to income if you’re in this business which is why i am talking about that or mentioning it. but yeah i think i answered the question.    :  keep prompting me.  :  everywhere. sometimes for me as a songwriter its conversation, someone can say something and i will never be able to describe how and when, a phrase something hits my ear and i say that and i write it down. and i think writing it down is very important you know i go through my notebooks i didn't know what the tasks were going to be today but i brought one of my moleskins that i take with me and write all the time and then i translate those to greater notebooks and i keep going through them, re-editing, knocking songs around. sometimes you have, ill have a good bit of music you know on guitar and i know it feels something and i can hear sort of a tune and then someone will say something. right and in an off handed way has no idea what i'm doing but in conversation. in fact one of the songs i am finishing on a record on my own right now that i am doing in the studio, everything came from what somebody said when she was talking about, she's a musician herself and she lived here, born and raised here and then lived somewhere else in the states for a while you know two or three other states and then she's back in la and she says at that time there is a lot of weirdness about la but i like to be here, it's an awfully pretty town. right and something, i would never tell you or describe what my mind did it just went awful pretty town and that was it, it's this beautiful town that can be weird and awful and that's what the song is, it's about all these other things you encounter here. and i went home and that was it, within an hour and a half, two hours i took that little thing, put all the lyrics together and it was done. but sometimes it comes from newspapers, reading stuff, in the news, sometimes you just think of something you know it just invades your head and you go ok yeah i like that. and there is a greater context and dialogue that you have and recognize with yourself and you write it down and maybe you look through the notebook and i remember writing this and then you start putting it together you know. sometimes, you get parameters. like i did something for a tv show and it was a tv show that was set in [city 1: where the tv show was set]. so of course everything became southern and swampy and you know with all these other tell tale signs of, they ear marked it as something appropriate for that. so i'm taking and borrowing an essence or the essences of certain things and try to meld those together but the song ended up being used you know in that show. it's something that i'm releasing now on the website in a couple of weeks so. where it comes from, you know if we knew where it came from we would all just buy a house on that street because it's priceless you know when it hits your like forget it, i got to pull over i have to do it now. and that's the other thing, inspiration is doing. and some, i forget what it was and i didn't take it to heart, it was more figure of speech and some project i was on they said man that's just genius. i said genius is doing and they didn't realize all the drafting i had done, all the revision i had done, everything you know what i mean, for it to boiled down to that little kernel of ba- it was chaos, it was nothing, it was just in the ether of the universe and then you. you know some days your like, you remember rabbit ears?  :  you know, the antennas. you got to adjust it a certain way. sometimes you have to open yourself up to that. cause that signal is always there. it's there, it's there now, it's all over you. it's everywhere. and you just some days you can't get away from it. and some days you can run around with a rope you’re not going to be able to put it around it. you can't find it. you know but the best thing for block is to just do it. you know if it's writing, you know manually writing lyrics, or if your writing a book or whatever, write! write something about the book, write something about being stuck, write something, mechanically, physically write. if it's playing like trying to get a phrase or a certain kind of signature lick for a song. keep playing it. you only got a limited number of notes. you'll figure it out. but you won't figure it out if you won't do it.  you know. but there is the asterisk for that. sometimes you just put everything away. you walk away, you open up the refrigerator. boom. there it is you can't figure it out. you know so maybe there is this built up latency and this inertia and your sort of like this tube of toothpaste. you never know quite how your going to step on it and it's just going to go and that's it .like i said you know if we knew where it was we'd live there.  : yeah?   :  yes. look up how many patents thomas edison had before he got the light bulb.  : you know a lot of stuff that was just crap. it failed.  : oh it's constant. it needs to be.   : well to me if it feels like it's done no, but if it feels like it has potential like it's going somewhere or you can start to see around corners like this is something you know, and that will happen sometimes you know you will have a lyric or turn a phrase your working on for years you just write it down you know write it down, write it down, write it down and then nothing, nothing, nothing and then all of a sudden it just you know remember those calendars that they use to have the computer generated background and you would look at it and it was just like a spectrum of colors and then you would look at it a certain way and you would go oh there's some kelp and there's a dolphin, there's a turtle, and there, it's kind of like that. you know, it's always there but you just have to know how to look at it. and sometimes you have to get out of your own way. sometimes you have to get in someone else's way. you don't know what but what you say or as you say generating or generation of, that's really the thing. you know because when you look at the greats at least in my field, that's what it is, bruce springsteen voluminous. i mean just what was the one i saw in a documentary recently. and by the way seeing these things makes us feel good that our compulsion and otherwise neurotic behavior is somehow justified or at least we're not alone. but badlands, this one particular song that's a staple of his catalog and his live shows he's like look, and there's page after page after page of just badlands. badlands. and what could of have been words all around it all around it and it's however many pages later or however many days or week later, there's the song that you know. the beatles. that's all they did was write. you know. they would just look at the mechanics of songs and write it and figure it out and they had so many ways to do it. and i say this is because i think they are the pen ultimate writers of pop music in so many styles. and that's all that they did. they were constantly writing. you know there's this generation, there's this critical mass that happens at some point where you can just do it.  you know um.  : ever so slightly, a little less than a lot. maybe average output. but i have also come to see over time that when i have to take care of real world things that's when the output goes down. it's a very direct correlation. one to one. it’s just you have a family outing, you've got these next two weeks your going to hammer down the taxes and do everything for the s corp and do all the bla bla bla bla. there's going to be less productivity typically. the lightning bolt can hit. someone can say something and you hear it a certain way you know what i mean but yeah there is that and that's probably the greater predictor of why it would ever be on the lower end of things.  : i don't know. because people don't usually put it into words like that when we talk about it. we all say things like you know how much time it takes to hammer out a bridge sometimes.  : you know, the bridge of a song. sometimes someone will say how long did it take to write that song? and i'll say 31 years. that's how old i was when i wrote it. because it takes all of your life to put it together and put yourself together and then your in it and your doing it and your playing and your getting feedback of all kinds. these things are all in your head at all times. you don't necessarily perceive it as such but it's there. so yeah, how long it takes man that's hard to say. because that one song i mentioned where somebody said something and had no idea what i was working on i went, i wrote it down on a napkin took it home, then it was done, but i had the music of it and the melodic of it for quite a while and i had other sets of lyrics, you know they were just work lyrics. and i was just like it's not going to be that, it's not going to be that. develop it a little more. now i know it's not going to be that, and then that magic key comes along. that's what its going to be. you know you can put that little thing in the clam and it doesn't always become a pearl. and then that one thing hits and then it's like there you go. there's the pearl. that's it. so it's hard, it's very difficult. it's not like were making you know 600 widgets a day.  : so many a hour, and these are the materials we're using. and you know that's it. you know it doesn't, i wish to work that way. you know.   : transformation is it i think. as much or more a connection. can you restate that a little bit so i can answer it better for you? : yeah. it's sort of bridging episodic and procedural memories. and then it just locks in. you know it's like gaps. your looking for that gap and then it goes and it's perfect. you know.  : that's one way to describe it. i mean. people say how do you know when something is done when i don't think anything can be done with it. i mean anything more. you have a sense. that's it. you've said what you need to say.  : maybe you know if anything i would just say it's being open and sympathetic to it. why that would occur with some individuals at all or more than other individuals i couldn't say. you know. that's, my goodness you would have to look at their entire life. why they're not, like i say it's there all the time. it's like when you’re in new york, there is this hum to the city. you can feel the energy. it's there. you know. it's not like something i can perceive like i am perceiving that cup. but i can just feel it. you know what i mean it's there. and i told people writing songs is probably one of the easiest things you will ever do. it's making the time to write the song. shut the door. turn off the phone. my wife will actually put part of a post it here. she does not want to know what time. once she sees the time then she knows how long she is working on something. for her that's a trigger that bounces her out of that mode. you know. which i think is a good idea. you know. but just shut everything off. you know.  : i am. when i'm working, i'm focused. laser focused. i am distractible, that's why i am careful to turn a phone off, to turn things off. you know. there is no way i would want to get online for a minute. you’re gone. there goes a half hour now you're out of it. you know you just to have that, you know, your, it, you have to be like someone who is wandering a store and there is no one else in there. and you have no budget, you have nothing to worry about. you just go to all the different sections and all the aisles and just look around and see what you need. and that's what. you know to me, song writing, your kind of like an alchemist at a flee market. your picking up these things, and your making sort of discrete choices whether you know it or not. things that mean something to your or move you or somehow strike you in a significant way. enough to accrue it. and then the alchemy happens at some point. you take it home and you’re like oh yeah oh how about that. yeah. cool. and how about, nah that sucks. you know, there is a lot of trial and error in it. : yeah. again. i think it's more intrinsic. if it grabs me in a certain way i will never forget it. if i am not interested in it, by the time it falls to the floor i forgot about it. i couldn't care less.  : i think you have to be uninhibited in a sense that you have to be open. you know be open to it if your talking about something about love or relationship or something that is a big reveal even though your writing it in a song. you know it's about you. let that go. let that be great. i think when you say perhaps that creatives have to be more, they have to inhibit more what is common, i think in some ways that could be true, i think though now that you mention it in some ways creative people find a way to, and i don't mean this by means of amplification, you know with like a guitar or an amp, but i think they amplify what is common.  : and in doing so they present in such a way that it's more striking and that it takes. it gets more notice from everybody else and i think that might be true because often it's said that artists who have the most appeal often they give you something that's almost everyday. you know. you know any kind of lyric can't buy me love. you know. sort of a truism. if you will. you can't buy me love. i'll buy you a diamond ring, i'll give you everything but i still can't, you know i still can't, love is it's own thing. and we know that, love is beyond the material, love is ephemeral. it's not material in that way. you know, it's a great way to get your toe tapping and get your heart and mind open. love's here, love's cool and it's not material. they just amplified it in a way like wow ok, they made you look at it in a perspective you don't normally do day to day.  : both. i think both and you know again like so many things in life it's striking a balance. so that you can just keep moving through the experience of the creating of it. don't judge it. you know. don't be so inhibited that you think this has got to be great everything has to be good. it can't be too personal, it can't be you know hey go sell insurance. that's what that gig is about. this gig is about, take off the clothes. put down the fences. do whatever you need to do. you know, howl at the moon. get that on paper. and trust it. and be ok with it. you know and i think in the end there is not much anyone can really say that's going to be too terrible. you know and most of the time people want to say things. you know the greater majority of songs that are copywritten are about love. there about relationship and love. so that tells you what's on a lot of peoples minds.  : no i'm pretty in a lot of ways capricious. i don't do things without thinking about it. in life there is a lot of planning that goes into what i do. i suppose accruing and learning but one of the things i learned is everything you learn you get it so that you can forget it. you know your not we're not thinking about vocabulary, we're not thinking about participles and subjects and predicates. we're speaking extemporaneously. that's the goal when your writing. that's the goal when your playing and experiencing something in the moment with other instrumentalists and an audience.  that's what you want to do. i mean, to say that something is improvised is quite a leap. you know because really we are re-constituting these building blocks that we've been accruing and refining and rearranging all of our creative lives. you know and maybe even beyond in our general lives.  : oh yes. i can be. for instance my wife, i work on one side of the house and she is way over on the other side and i have my area. my learning area. you know so people say. you know. gotta learn this. gotta be this. i'll pull up the computer and listen. like let's say i have a gig. this weekend i got one and i had to learn three sets of music. stuff that's fairly familiar to me. some of it i knew already but the stuff i needed to know and i am listening and she will walk by. there's this phrase, seven seconds long. what is that and i'll play it, it's close. it would do for anybody but i got to know why did he do that. where's that, another hour she'll walk by, it'll be that same phrase. : you know. part of it is different again. you know intrinsic motivation. when i show up i want people to know that guy's gonna have it. he's gonna handle it. it's one of those things. but beyond that i want to know that i can know. you know cause i know that it's there. he's got the same instrument that i do, he's got the same notes at his disposal. right. it's exactly the same. the only difference is him. right. he's the thing animating this. now i got to try to click over. you know. it's that calendar again where you can see all, i got to click in, i have to sweat like he's sweating when he plays that note. that's the compulsion and then sometimes in a lyric oh man it can be- and you know your pretty much done with the song except for this phrase. it can be days. you know where you just, i'll go have some orange juice and i'll look at it again.  : i'll drive over here and come back and look at it again. i'll write it down and take it with me and look at it again. you want it to be. your trying to get these things out. you know. it's really weird. it's almost like. i don't know what to compare it to. but yeah compulsive. yeah. absolutely. my brother in law knows that i am compulsive very much so and he should know. he's known me for a long time. he happens to be a doctor of psychology.   : man you really, got the fever for that thing. you really your just out of your mind when it comes to finding it. but you know what the other people i know that i play with are that way too. there's this thing where somehow the thing that becomes crucial and critical is the, the proper transmission of this thing. it's somebody's song, were playing somebody's song, were playing it for a bunch of people. we don't even know who's in the crowd but we want to have it. it's important to us. why that is. why, that's the leap. that's the madness.  : one of each.  : my sister is an executive and she does very well. she is i think very creative in her approach to what she does and how she does it. i think that's been a boom to her in her career and certainly for the people who are lucky enough to have her on their team at various times. my brother is creative in different ways. i'm-working with my hands is music for me, other than that i would never ever work with my hands. he's that kind of guy who will build his own house and did at one point and it was wonderful i have to say. he did, he stoned his own chimney. and did all the chinking in between the stones. you know so there is a creativity there. there's an art. my father was a jeweler and a watchmaker. he had a day job also but that was really his career and when he retired at 50 that's what he did for the rest of his life. for some twenty, almost thirty years and he was wonderful at it. so there's, you know when your working with a watch, an actual watch not something that's you know quartz or digital and all the movements are working there. there's a lot of balance and you know very discrete choices that you're making to make this thing go so there's a creativity there too and there's that compulsion. you know my sister is that way with her compulsion too. it's gotta be right. her staff they always loved her and they appreciate her but they know they have to be on their game. you know because that's what this is about. it's about doing it at a certain level. if your going to show up to do it let's do it right you know. : already? : gosh. you mean a single thing or in general, in total or? : state the question again please.  : gosh. my own creative expression. i think for me it's a matter of discovering that you can do something at a particular level and discovering what it is that you can communicate and discovering how it is that you manifest that and generate that. what form it takes you know. so let's say are you're doing opera, are you doing blues, are you doing you know swahili world music, whatever, whatever floats your boat. that you can find what it is you need to do, how you need to do it, for whatever is important to you and sympathetic to you. and that you can build a means of communicating that to people outside of yourself. in other words, you’re trying to put together the parameters of a career you know that you can have recordings that are consumed by fans if you will. people that enjoy your music, you can have, give live concert engagements. you know tours, whatever you want to call it where people will come and you can communicate that. there's also for me you know creativity is not just about writing songs it's about playing music, it's about being an instrumentalist, it's being among musicians. for me that's very important. i can guess why. my siblings are almost twenty years older than i am and as a youngest i was also kind of an only. you know and it's important for me to be in that milieu where we've all have something in common and we're all working towards things that are common whether it's a recording session or doing something live. whatever it is and being able to fit in that way, be part of it and enjoy the fraternity of it, the comradery of it, the challenges of it. you know i hate to cheap it and just say i love it but that's a big part of it too. you know i've had plenty of opportunities to do a lot of different things in my life outside of music and this what i either keep choosing or come back to, however you want to look back at it. you know people say what would you do if you had a choice, if you could do anything you wanted to do. i do and this is what i do. you know. it's maddening at times. it's disheartening. it's disappointing. it's a soul crusher. it's just a right pain in the ass. i mean i have to look at it and say are you nuts? for what you're doing sometimes. i don't care, i think that that's a big part of it. you just have to be committed. i don't mean by the state  :  i mean you have to be committed. you know i think, i think it's a matter of following through for me. you know it's an enjoyment and in a way it's almost like an expression where among musicians i can almost tell a joke, hey you know they did bla bla and remember i did it like, oh yeah cool great. you know it's one of those and then for a listener somebody who gets an idea of something. you know maybe i gave them a perspective on something they didn't assume you know or something they took for granted. or i put it in a different way where they had to take a look at it. or i amplified it as they say. that's a big rush to me. i know that there's this goal to communicate to overall whether it's just sonically with a guitar or whether your singing, writing words that affect a certain thing. it's i guess just being able to transmit what you feel and what your experiencing. you know if i could boil it down and not just say i love it. it's transmitting that you know and trying to, i suppose your trying to give a little bit of your self and your trying to give a little bit of what the world is. it's filtered through you. you know hey man this is how i am experiencing it. you know have a little bit of it. that's the best i can do with that one. 