: it will be interesting for me as well. -laughs-  : ...i guess it would have to be the my connectome project because its so different from anything that anyone has ever done and it uh took such an amount of personal fortitude to actually do it. : i think that's certainly part of it. : uh i think that's certainly part of it yeah. i mean it's, i think that’s why it hasn’t been done before just because in order to study any individual that intensely for that amount of time - i mean it's hard to – it's hard to imagine that. it's gonna be very easy to get people off the street to do it period. i mean i think well be able to find them to do it, but its you know having a proof of concept on you know someone like me i think is really important and it's, it was actually really useful for me just to see how hard it was because going into it, it wasn’t clear to me how difficult it was going to be. : um the fact, i think it was the fact that i had announced that i was doing it. -laughs- : it was kind of like a, you know, commitment device having announced it on facebook and other places. : right, right exactly. : um well, i mean i assume i have some amount of grit that allowed me to hang in there.  i mean i have no doubt that a lot of my colleagues probably could have done the same thing if they wanted to, so i think it’s a combination of um of being a little bit crazy and you know wanting to do things that hadn't been done and in um and having some pride in being able to do something like that. : that's correct. : oh that's funny –laughs-. : hm, interesting. probably anxiety. : i don’t remember when i started having anxiety. probably in graduate school actually i don’t think i really - i mean i was shy in high school but i never really like suffered from like real anxiety attack sort of anxiety.  it wasn’t until graduate school that that happened, and... and it really –ya know i think it just really obviously it didn’t cripple me in the sense that i was able to get by, but um but it, you know it made life painful in a lot of ways.  particularly in social situations like public speaking and that sort of stuff.  um and it wasn’t - actually i, for many years i would take beta blockers before i gave talks and it wasn't until i came here to [college 1] and um and just ya know decided that i couldn’t live like that anymore and so had a chat with [person 1] who hooked me up with her colleagues who has a little clinic in beverley hills, i forgot what his name was.  but i had a [neighborhood 1] therapist for a little while which made me feel very classy.  i just did like standard cbt stuff and it actually worked. pretty much.  i mean, you know i'm still a little keyed up on occasion, but uh but yeah the cbt got me over the expression of anxiety in most of my life, so - : yeah, psychology actually works. -laughs- : exactly, yeah - i tried, i think i tried paxil.  i've tried ssri and it was a horrible experience. : yeah.  i wa - i felt, i basically walked around in like a constant panic attack for two or three days um and i decided i can't take these things. : the course of therapy took 10 weeks i think and obviously i didn’t notice it immediately after that.  the other thing that really helped was yoga.  like i started doing yoga around that time and um i think that helped with just um being able to calm my mind, you know focus.   : so it probably, well i would say it probably took a year or so to kind of make that full journey from pre to post. : -laughs- : um. self doubt.  that's probably the biggest one.   : sorry, what do you mean? : it isn't so much having done something wrong, it's - well maybe it is.  it's really just not being good enough, right?  it's this imposter syndrome thing that i think all - most of our colleagues experience, you know, especially when you end up at a place like [college 2] and you're surrounded by a bunch of other people who are at least ostensively, or at least the smartest people in the room.   : exactly : but i've got them pretty well fooled. interviewer: yeah, no i think that a lot of people are believers.  um and uh but yeah i understand that may not always be so comforting. : yeah. : yeah. i mean my career is – my career started out really funny.  ya know the place where i did my undergraduate basically didn’t have anybody doing experimental psychology.  um i never had a cognitive psychology class because they didn’t offer one.  i had like a bio psych class and you know other stuff like that and it was - and i was originally planning to go do like animal behavior stuff and then one of my professors who was like a learning – animal learning guy um got me to - i forget - he basically was pointing me at some cognitive stuff, suggesting that i go read stuff and actually the book that i read that really made me think i want to do cognitive stuff was daniel dennett's, brainstorms, which ya know is a collection of his papers. um which kind of fit with - you know i always had a slightly philosophical vent.  i was a minor in philosophy in college and i read a lot of epistemology and philosophy of mind and stuff like that.  um but it was really dennett that really pushed me to think of cognitive sciences as a thing to study.  but i originally wasn’t gonna go do uh do – you know do cognitive neuroscience because i didn’t really know about cognitive neuroscience and it was just starting to - you know this was like the late 80's, it was starting to become a thing then.  so i went to grad school to do cognitive psychology.  originally i went to work with this woman, [person 3], who did like a analogical reasoning work and i lasted in her lab about 3 months. um our styles didn’t mesh.  she needed somebody who was actually ready to do stuff and i was so clueless. god you know i hadn't learned anything! -laughs- i knew what i had read from you know the library. so i was behind a lot of the other grad students.  i don’t know why they let me into grad school, but they saw something, so.  so i went to work for another guy, [person 4], who was working on sort of like consciousness and implicit cognition stuff and worked with him for about a year and a half and then [person 5] arrived at [college 3] and um and i was sort of drawn to the mixture of kinda cognitive and neuro stuff that he was doing.  but neuro stuff was primarily patient work with memory disorder patients.  and so that, you know kind of pulled me in to uh into cognitive neuroscience to begin with but what's funny is that i was really anti-imaging and you know it was kind of easy to be anti-imaging in 93/94 because so much of it was, like low-hanging fruit, so much of it was so bad.  and so i went to [college 2] to do my post doc, not to do imaging but to do patient work with parkinson's and huntington's patients, you know basal ganglia uh involvement in skill learning and i got there and the patient population wasn’t as good as i had expected and um everyone was doing fmri and i kind of realized that the geeky part of me really liked the kind of stuff that one does when one is doing fmri, um and so i kinda got sucked into it.  so it was ya know - there have been a couple of ya know sort of interesting just sorta complete happenstance sort of things like [person 5] showing up at [college 3], um ya know me showing up in [person 6]'s lab and kind of having what i expected to happen, not happen and so uh those have clearly been big - big formative things for me. : that's a good question.  i guess cognitive neuroscience is what i would think my field is.  : i guess, ya know so - the question is whether you're asking about specifically my field or science in general. : so i guess, in general, the things i think are really important or the things i take away from how my career has passed and what's important is um the ability to um capitalize on luck.  to sort of end up in a – um in a lucky situation and, or basically capitalize on happenstance.  um because you get the feel that a lot of young people have various specific plans for how they want their careers or lives to go and you know had i had that i can see how i could have easily gotten discouraged and uh ya know sort of lost it, but you know i feel like i was able to take advantage of, of luck and sort of ya know turn when turning was necessary. : yeah. : yeah, exactly. yep. : yeah its tough because there's so much - i find cognitive neuroscience – training in cognitive neuroscience – really frustrating because there's so much you have to know.  you have to know the neuroscience stuff, you have to know the cognitive stuff, you have to know the technical stuff for ground imaging and data analysis and statistics and blah blah blah - and um and i think that my advice is to get really solid grounding in the basics, particularly in cognition.  because i think it's really hard to do good cognitive neuroscience if you don’t know the cognitive side well. : right, right -laughs-. : i think its really important.  i mean certainly i feel like i - i feel lucky to be in places where i ended up ya know as part of social networks that uh that certainly helped with my success.  so like coming here, ya know got hooked in with people part of human brain mapping – particularly [person 7] who kind of pulled me into the organization, ended up winning the young investigator award a few years later which wouldn’t have happened ya know without those connections and that kind of spearheads other things so i think that, i – ya know i mean i never thought of myself as a particularly socially skilled person, um but i'm high enough in the distribution that i think it's been a plus and not a minus. : yeah, definitely. : i think that has to be true to some degree, yeah. um and i think i was lucky enough to be doing stuff that was, that the herd was interested in in that time. you know i think that if i - i think it's inevitable that you start your career doing things that are more - that are – i hate to use this metaphor – that are more inside the box and i think you - as you get into where we are in our careers, you are free to do things that are a little bit more creative and potentially really interesting.  i mean you can do interesting stuff you know within the confines of the herd, right, and that's how some people get ahead and some don’t but it seems like the really interesting stuff is when you break from the herd.  but you can't really do that unless, you know, unless the herd has enough faith in you i guess. i don't know. : yeah, exactly -laughs-.  : i think for me it's always been about synthesis. ya know i try to read really broadly and think really broadly and um and try to think about how i can bring things in from other areas that might help us understand things in a different way.  so i think for me its ya know often when i end up doing something interesting, it's been because of that.  there's a - keith holyoake has a great quote from uh from stepehen jay gould which i have to look up to get right but it's something like, "they key to success in science is basically a broad understanding and a um a fertile ability to make analogies."  something like that.  ya know and so i think that’s, obviously there's different ways to get ahead and do great science, but i think one of them is to, you know kind of look broadly and kinda try to pull things together from different areas. : i think its uh kind of a random walk for me.  i pull often, often pull pop science books i think sound interesting um and um, you know kind of see where they take me and sometimes they take me good places and sometimes they don’t, but uh it'll usually start that way and if its an area that i'm really interested in i'll talk to people that know about it, you know, or reading more scholarly sorts of stuff. : well, i don’t know if it surprised me, but i really enjoyed svante paabo's book about the um sequencing of the neanderthal genome, um which it’s a really fun book just talking about his history as a scientist, and clearly he's in a very different league from me. um ya know he talks about, he at various point has science and nature both and editors from both calling him up, asking if they – if he will submit his paper to their journal. : -laughs- yeah right. um, but, um yeah that was a fun book to learn more about the challenges of that kind of work and an interesting thing that comes out of it is, he's – obviously he's telling the story so who knows how true this really is, but the way he tells it is there's all this stuff published on kind of ya know ancestral ancient genomes that's mostly bs because the methods to actually do it well weren't in place until his lab came along and showed like how to do it without contamination from other sources because obviously ya know you're taking little pieces of bone that have been sitting in a museum for a long time and you are trying to pull dna out of it so there is a lot of room for contamination. it's just interesting to hear that sort of journey. : i think starting out with [person 5], certainly was a very strong influence. and you know clearly his miniature ship was not all flowers and sunshine, but um he taught me some kind of habits of thinking i think that uh have stuck with me just sort of very critical thinking about uh ya know cognitive functions and their relationships to brain systems and i think that was, i learned how to think from him more than from anyone else. : i really think it's just sort of trying to figure out what the alternatives are. right. thinking deeply about what the alternative explanations are which is what we're supposed to do as scientists period.  i think he was just very good at teaching as an example how to do that. : depends on what you mean by important. so you know  i'll be honest, i don’t feel like i'm a very good mentor.  and i think that’s in part because i've always been a bit of a lone wolf.  and i also - i think it also reflects my - the way that i feel that my mentorship went that i, i did a lot on my own. i had a fairly light touch mentorship and i feel like that’s actually a really important thing because i think if you're a graduate student and your advisor gives you all your experiments you have to do and you're not being creative, you're going to go out in the world and not know whether you have the chops to be creative in the world, so being a grad student with me is not very fun unless you're someone whose really able to come up with new ideas on your own and um and you know some can do it and some can't.  i think i'm better with post docs because most of them made it over the hump, you know because you don’t get a phd unless usually unless you're somewhat good at coming up with your own ideas and so i've had better luck with post docs i think.  i mean i really enjoy working with post docs. i mean i enjoy working with grad students too, i just find it really challenging. : um i you know uh yes.  well, sorry.  there's certain people from whom there's a really strong signal that they’re going to make it, yes, and i've had a few where that's clear.  others, the signals are weaker and it's kind of harder to predict; sometimes they'll do well, sometimes they won’t. : i mean for me, it's usually - it's funny because it's almost an intuitive sense but i think it has to do with the degree to which it's clear that the person really knows their stuff, doesn’t talk out their ass - that's when i get worried is when i have a post doc show up and within the first month i hear them saying things i know not to be true, as if with complete confidence, right.  that's when i get worried.  but it's really yeah when i, when i - occasionally i've had post docs with i feel like i'm with a colleague rather than a trainee, and it's really an intuitive sense about that. : um, i mean i think certainly men - well you know the women who make it in our field, clearly you have to be pretty aggressive because there's all sorts of biases right that one as a – as a female scientist you have to encounter, and so i really like aggressive people in general um and so there's some of the top women in the field i really like because, you know sometimes they'll put people off right because women, often women who are aggressive are viewed in a negative way. i generally like it.  i'm also pretty good at general act, kind of putting up with other people's personality traits that you know that might put off others.  i've collaborated with some people who hardly anyone else can collaborate with. -laughs-  no one in this room!   : where was i, oh men and women.  yeah i mean i don’t think i can make any generalizations other than to say that, you know my life has been funny because certain points in my life have been very heavily female.  other points have been very heavily male.  it's very heavily male right now and you know i can't say that its really been any different for me as a mentor one way or the other. : well, yeah. i mean i think it depends on what you mean by success.  i know people who treat themselves horribly, who work way too much, who don't exercise, who eat terribly and they publish a lot of papers and get a lot of grants and uh you know uh they're famous, right.  i would – i would rather have a balanced life you know where i feel good about myself physically, um do some things other than working so that i feel like i'm not just uh – i'm not just stuck in the lab all day and night.  for me, that's really important.  and obviously different people differ on where they – where they put their threshold for balance.  but i think particularly on the physical side, people who don’t - people who allow their career aspirations to prevent them from sleeping and prevent them from exercising, its hard to imagine that’s sustainable in the long run.  i don’t have enough good you know kind of older scientific role models to know, you know like i know [person 8] swims like every morning and i think that certainly fitness is really important as you get older.  and so i'v - you know it's really been in the last 5 years that i've - i mean i was never one of these workaholics, right.  but i can't say i was really attuned to my fitness and nutrition until about 5 years ago when i started seeing a trainer regularly, changed how i ate, and uh and you know generally feel much better. : um well its interesting because i think going through that experience of making a radical change in my diet certainly got me to start thinking more about behavioral change, which has become one of the issues that my lab has started studying, so it's definitely a research is me search kind of experience there.  and i think that... it's hard to say how i feel about myself.  certainly i feel better, right.  back when i was eating carbs, every afternoon, 3:30, i was down at the candy machine because i felt a dip in energy and now i can you know work all day and you know feel much more steady and i can't really say that my brain power is any better than it was then, but i'm also five years older.  i'm on that downward trajectory -laughs-. : yeah, i just need to eat more saturated fat to keep my brain healthy. : well i think certainly my family was very strongly attuned to working, right.  so you know my dad really instilled a work ethic into us.  he made us go - you know he owned - he was accountant but also owned another house that he rented out and we'd have to go mow the grass at those places once a week you know in the summer when it's 105 degrees out, and um so i think that, that's where a lot of the grit comes from.  and also the fact that he was pretty stern father and just dealing with the physical discipline. i mean that's probably also where some of the anxiety comes from, who knows, but uh but certainly it also kind of instilled some grit. and the other thing i have to give my parents is they were always very -like they always basically said things like it doesn’t matter if you're the president or a garbage man, as long as your happy.   : uhh 20 - we've been together for 23 years now. : hmm...that's a good question.  i mean certainly i enjoy having a partner who's not a scientist.  i like to be able to come home and not talk shop, but it's also challenging because it's hard not to bring scientist home with you and people who aren't scientists don’t always appreciate that we ask questions about everything. right, you know we challenge everything.  it's what we get paid to do.  that's how you make it in this business.  but that doesn’t always work so well you know at home.  : -laughs- so, you know that’s a good challenge to try to figure out how to balance that. um and you know certainly some of the experiences she's had have fed into my scientific interests.  she went, she had a big weight loss endeavor back when we lived here and you know sort of going through that with her and seeing how that worked and seeing her keep it off and the challenges inherited to that have been interesting, again it's another example of behavioral change.   : you know, to be honest often it - it depends on who shows up in the lab um  because, well, so i guess you have to differentiate what i'm going to work on and what the labs going to work on. right, because often - at least for the last decade kind of you know i've had things going on the side that i didn’t really involve most of the people in the lab in just because they were just too kooky.  so stuff like the cognitive atlas project, right, which a grad student in the department, [person 9], helped me come up with.  we worked together with you and others.  but um but i didn’t have my grad students working on it because it seemed like the kind of project that would be a career disaster for a grad student. so i've always sort of had that - my connectome is sort of like that as well, right it's something i involved my grad students in but it was really my project.  so i think i'm different than a lot of similar pi's in having these kind of you know things of my own on the side, and those are the things that i think are actually more creative.  the stuff that's going on that students are doing are often more bread and butter, you know cognitive neuroscience.  and there, that stuff has been heavily driven by, in most cases, by you know the post docs in the lab and what their interests are. in some cases that dovetails with funding opportunities.  if it turns out in area, you know if we have five interests and there's money in one of those areas and i want to go after, that's where we're gonna go because we have to pay for what we do.  um but i think the stuff i do on my own is the more creative, the kookier stuff. um i think that's the stuff that really comes from this synthetic drawing across areas. : i mean i think it certainly feels to me that its largely intuitive.  that it's really kind of u what set of ideas kinda you know smells right, smells new.  it's hard to – it's hard to explain it in terms of some type of rational process. : right, right.  : that’s audio? okay. : (-laughs-) : i have—yes i have an experience with journalists actually. (-laughs-) i—i've put my foot in my mouth before with journalists. : that’s—yeah, that’s the headline. (-laughs-) : yeah thanks. : oh that’s good! yeah!  : okay. : i think my (one inaudible word, 1:35) is quite small, so you'll see. are you—are you gonna do any dti or tractology? : okay. : uh huh. : or if i've got some place that’s disconnected from the rest. (-laughs-) : yeah i just want to see—i just want to see the end result, right? not the raw data.  : so do you guys do that, or do you have colleagues in the\ : right, that’s your job? : down at the scanner right? : who will be looking at his own brain. : (-laughs-) yeah, to rattle his cage! i like that.  : oh, so do you have a personalized set of, hmm, images to show me—that are ready? : yeah exactly. : okay. : uh huh. : uh huh. : uh huh. : is he the guy that said that once you're 30 it’s over? : yeah that’s? : your scientific creative, well i—i—i liked to show a graph in one of my teaching courses on aging\  : \where you show a plot of people’s cognitive ability as they age, and you know it’s horrible\ : \hmm and you put the lucky fitted curve to that plot. say you see your decline by this much over time, and you say now let’s look at this data set again, and the data set is what if you correct for hearing loss and vision loss.  : and all of the sudden the line flattens back out again.  : that and this is old data, but unless you have alzheimer's, you're not really declining.  : i don’t know about creativity, but your standard cognitive test—you're not declining. you might even be getting better because you've taken the test a hundred times now. : (-laughs-) so you know you are familiar, you're comfortable with it.   : yeah, to compensate or do it in a different way.  : whereas processing speed might—  : right. : and we’ll—we'll be fine forever. : my goal. that’s my goal! so— : well i'm 50. don’t tell [interviewer 2] but i’m—i'm 50 and i—i know i feel like i'm a 25-year- old. : like i’m still… physically no, my knees hurt. it’s… but i don’t mentally—i feel like i'm still a kid. : i don’t know! i—i—  : ahh because i've always been—i’ve always been the most curious person around me!  : i'm just naturally curious. and creative… i don’t know, like i said earlier, but in terms of curiousness, i've just always wondered why. you know, whether why do we have to put a seat belt on, why do i have to eat my vegetables. you know, i was always a very questioning, troublesome kid.  : and so i've just never stopped, you know, when—when you hook your computer in your office. i suppose an average person calls it and says, “i have a new computer hook me up,” and i hook my computer up. i figured it out because i just want to know.  : i want to know why the gps in the car works the way it does, how many satellites it needs. i just, you know, i don’t go anywhere without something to read.  : i'm just a curious person. : that i can’t and—i can’t explain why, and i think that—i don’t know—i got bumped on the head or that’s the way i came out i'm more curious. : (-laughs-) : right. : huh. : so i was just going to say, agreeableness like… i don’t know that if i'm a very agreeable person.  : what is agreeableness, how well you get along with others how well you\ : \accept the norms? : not one of those. : no you need to poke it. : you need to poke and see whether it works. : oh absolutely.  : so last week i was in the park on camp—hmm we—we live on faculty housing on campus, so you own the house, the university owns the land, and there's parks and passageways and things through there. and so i'm at the park and there's a—a light pole on the basketball court, and there's a hmm, a button on the light pole, but there's no signage. and so i'm looking at the button and a guy at the basketball, "oh don’t touch that button, that hmm—that turns on the lights." like what, okay really? does it turn on the lights? it—it probably should, but why—why not touch the button?  : why if you touch the button in the daylight, the lights shouldn't go on because there will be a sensor for that, right? bang i touched the button, because i'm not going to not touch the button. are you kidding? so i touched the button, and the lights did not turn on by the way.  : so there's a light sensor and\  : \and it works properly. but i—i—i need to poke the buttons or unplug the\  : \unplug the switch and see what happens. : … that’s hard to say. hmm i think you know, scientifically if i'm going to talk about my career, the thing i'm most proud of is the—the experiment… so a lot of people take in neural stem cells of some kind or—or another, and put them into a spinal cord injury model. so this is a—a very popular target for early stem cell therapeutics, and one of the big questions in the field was if you put stem cells into an animal model, and the animal gets better, hmm do you—how do you know the stem cells did it and that the stem cells are functionally integrated with the animal or did they? the other possibility is there were autotrophic factors; they were repairing the environment and once the repairs are done, you don’t need the stem cells anymore. so my—hmm my big epiphany moment in that domain was to say, “well what if you could selectively kill the human cells after the animals recovered, and if the animal gets worse, you would know that the human cells had to be functionally integrated with the host.”  : and if the animal stayed the same, (doorbell ringing) you know that they'd helped with the repair, but they're no longer needed.  : and so my big epiphany was to realize from a cell culture experiment i had read about—i hadn't done it myself—was that diphtheria toxin is a hundred times more toxic to humans cells than to rodent cells.  : and so people had used diphtheria toxin in a culture dish where if you have a mouse cells and human cells growing together in a dish, you could put the right dose of diphtheria toxin in that dish\  : \and just kill the human cells. and then you could harvest out the—hmm the animal cells.  : so i reasoned if you could give the right dose to animals, you could kill all the human cells and remove your transplant.  : and so we got a bunch of animals hmm, transplanted with these human stem cells, and it took six to eight weeks for the animals to recover and for the stem cells to work, whatever mechanism they were doing. and then we gave half of those transplant animals diphtheria toxin and half of the control animals diphtheria toxin and hmm, the technicians were blind to which animals got what.  : and a week later we went back and tested them, and all of the stem cell animals that didn’t get the diphtheria toxin were still improved. and everyone who got diphtheria toxin, they were back down to the same level as the control animals. : so they lost their ability to walk again.  : and that was—that was the definitive example that stem… this kind of stem cell—i don’t think all types of stem cells, to set the record straight—but for this type of neural stem cell, they need to be functionally integrated with the circuit. : or they are not going to be functioning properly and they need to remain there.  : ahh if you take them away, and the animal survives that procedure they hmm\  : \the stem cells are no longer there and the animal gets worse again. : that was a classic example of waking up in the middle of the night, having dreamed that there's a way to do it. and i don’t, i—i don’t normally believe in that nonsense you know, that you're creative in your sleep, because i just generally don’t remember my dreams. : you know i have friends that are lucid dreamers and they remember everything and—  : i'm not one of those. so hmm, i remember waking up early in the morning and realizing we that you know, you—we should be able to give animals a toxin, a human toxin, and not hurt the animal, just hurt the human cells that were in the animal. : i think the… yeah, the question of how can you—yes how can you prove that what it is the human cells are doing.  : that question and we still don’t know the full answer to that. i'm glossing over the details but— : hmm you know, is it because they turn into neurons? is it because they turn into re-myelinating cells? is it because they hmm, are an astrocyte? and you know, there's a lot of possibilities even in the—the model that we have.  : so this is hmm, you know that one diphtheria experiment did not solve the whole question. we are now engineering cells to get at those questions.  : but it’s certainly the—that issue of how do the cells work\  : \in a model system, what are they actually doing\ : \has been—  : … has been and still is a central question to the neural transplant field. : uh i—i don’t remember.  : hmm i'm sure going back on it now\  : \there was… there was published accounts of diphtheria toxin being used in cell culture.  : so and then when we read that\  : \and i came up with this idea, we then went to a culture experiment, and we gave different doses of diphtheria toxin, figured out that it works in our model. it kills the cells we had been using, and then we just scaled up from there to an animal, and it worked the first time. and it worked the first time. the good news was that it worked the first time.  : but it was a gamble. we didn’t… we knew we were giving a dose that shouldn’t hurt the animals\  : \and only kill the human. but until you do it and look at the end, you have to sacrifice the animals and look for the human cells and oh, there—there aren't any.  : they are gone.  : and the cohort that didn’t get the diphtheria toxin, they are still there.  : that’s a very long drawn out process of\  : you know you have an idea and you don’t know whether that idea is gonna come into fruition for months.  : yeah, that’s a—i was in psychology and philosophy in college.  : and i was frustrated by the difficulty of human experiments.  : that you know you can’t poke any human brains. there wasn't a functional mri. then either so you couldn’t poke any human brains. so i wanted to get at the scientific level where i actually could manipulate things. : uh huh. : “what are you talking about?”  : no! (-laughs-) : so i have a physicist friend hmm, in the university and retired but he was… worked on the hydrogen bomb for the russians before he escaped.  : and he doesn’t believe in any of this psycho. anything, any neuroscience, it’s all nonsense. it’s just, you know, hard cold physics.  : hmm. : you know he smokes and he doesn’t have cancer, and he's, you know, 80, so like see— : that smoky stuff is nonsense.  : it’s like population statistic igor, you know. but hmm, he needs to be more exact than i am. i need to be more exact than psychology.  : but there’s all levels.  : yeah.  : yeah.  : ahh… let's see. i mean, so i have always been curious. i had a chemistry set. i made gunpowder when i was a kid. i blew stuff up. hmm i made solutions turn colors. but you know that's pseudo-science but it's—it's learning the building blocks.  : hmm i liked, i—i loved science in high school, in—in grade school and high school. i always knew i wanted to do, i always knew i wanted to be a professor or a, you know, discover—discover teacher or some kind of thing like that. but i guess i got into neuroscience, hmm so i had an older brother who's a drug addict or was a drug addict. he's hmm mostly better now. (-laughs-) and i was very curious at that time, like why—why do some people become addicted and others don’t.  : you know, why is that i can take an illicit drug and be moderate about it, and other people go spiraling down a—a pathway, and so what's different about their brains.  : so i really got into—well if you’re gonna be a scientist, hmm if you’re curious about things. hmm why, you know, the brain is a very unsolved, very curious thing. i had, you know, my father was an alcoholic, my brother was a drug addict, later on much after i started science, my other brother was—is an alcoholic. hmm i'm not. (-laughs-) you know i can moderate.  : and actually i find why is that. why can i… my—my younger brother is addicted to hmm, cigarettes.  : hmm i smoked a cigarette once. and the—the good news is i smoked a cigarette. did i tell you this story? : when i was young—kind of get into digression, but sorry. when i was young i was with my brother who's the… it was brother one, two and three, so i'm number three. so i'm the third; i was the youngest for quite some time until my younger brother, ten years younger showed up. so for a long time there were the three of us. brother number two who was a great athlete, and, you know, well liked by the girls. he bummed some cigarettes off of somebody, and we're all biking together and i'm trying to catch up with him. you know he's better than i am, and i—he smoked a cigarette, and i say let me try. so he gives me a cigarette as we turn to go down a steep hill. and i take a cigarette and i go (inhaling noise). and of course, i destroy my lungs and i am coughing, and i’m out of control and i wiped out going down the hill. you know, skinning my knees, skinning the palms of my hands. and the bike lands on top of me, and the water bottle pops open and gonna go “glug glug glug glug glug glug” on top of me, while my lungs are burning. and so the great news is that, one wipe out was the one trial learning of—oh, cigarettes suck! not interested. : so you know, i think i've heard the story of some dad who found his kid smoking and made them smoke a whole pack of cigarettes, and the kid got sick.  : and that taught them not to smoke. maybe that's a good solution.  : or you know, give your kid a cigarette and push him off on a skateboard.  : let him wipe out. cause it worked very well. so hmm, why, you know, do i not like cigarettes, hmm why am i not attracted to alcohol, why are other people, why are my brothers hmm, different.  : so in—in college i studied psychology and—and neurobiology and worked in a lab. ahh actually worked in a lab as an undergraduate studying ecstasy.  : hmm so the—the real story, whether you edit or not we’ll see, the real story is i was curious. i really wanted to try ecstasy.  : but it was a new drug.  : and you know you shouldn't try new drugs until they have been experimented on by other people.  : hmm how does this drug work.  : so i’m in my neuro-psycho-pharmacology work, and i ask the professor how does ecstasy work.  : hmm and he was a smart enough guy to know that you’re only asking cause you want to try the drug. and his expertise was in amphetamines. and he said, hmm well actually nobody knows how ecstasy works.  : it's too new a drug.  : and so i was appalled that a college professor doesn't know the answer to\  : \how this drug works. so after class i am talking to him, and he says, so if you’re so curious about ecstasy, why don't you come join my lab? : and i was doing psychology. i was a psych major, so i was doing psychology experiments as my undergraduate research.  : and he's like, “well we actually, you know, we would take amphetamines or cocaine, and we give them to rats, and we study the firing patterns and the reward centers of the brain.”  : “and you know, if you want to study how ecstasy works, join my lab and we'll test it.”  : so i did. i joined his lab, and i spent hmm, two years studying ecstasy.  : and the—the other cool story there, if you put an electrode into the ventral tegmental area of the brain, the reward center you can listen through an amplifier electrical system, you can listen to dopamine neurons firing\  : \and you give them a shot of amphetamine, and they'll go “ba ba ba ba ba ba ba.” and they go quite fast for… depends on how long you give, what—what the dose was.  : but they speed up and they eventually calm down to their original firing rate. so that's your control experiment of here’s how amphetamine works. ecstasy is methylenedioxymethamphetamine. so it's a derivative of amphetamines. so we now will give the animal ecstasy, so you give them a shot of ecstasy and it goes “ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba!” and i'm like “where'd my neuron go,” and well you know, sometimes you lose neurons. try it again, try it again. so after doing quite a lot of finding dopamine neurons, measuring the—the—the effect of cocaine or amphetamine on them.  : and then giving them ecstasy and seeing them die.  : we decided that ecstasy was a neurotoxin, and maybe you don't want to take it in the doses that we were giving these rats.  : and i, so as an—as an undergraduate, i discovered how ecstasy works.  : and that you don't want to take it.  : hmm and then since tragically i didn't know better, at the time i didn't publish that study. i never finished it. and then years later a study came out that methylenedioxymethamphetamine is toxic to ventral tegmental dopamine neurons.  : so i am glad i never tried.  : that's why, (-laughs-) you know, that's another example of pushing the button. i want to see how this works, and if it doesn't work. if it works, great, if it doesn't work, do something different. : and that got me into grad school. : oh yeah, it helped me not destroy my brain, and it helped me get into grad school, so… (-laughs-) : well so hmm, yeah, quite a few. hmm my—my mother was a lab technician\ : \before she got pregnant. and in those days, they said, “oh welcome to motherhood, you don't have a job anymore.” so she was sent home. hmm that—those are the old days, right? they're different now. 
 : hmm but ahh so she was—she was, you know, buying me a chemistry setter, you know, buying me a microscope, that kind of thing. hmm and, very analytical.  : hmm so that was an influence. my—i had a fantastic hmm, ap biology teacher in high school. [name 1: biology teacher’s name], still remember his name.  : and just a really good teacher, you know, educator who was hmm, let me do things in class that, you know, probably, you know, nowadays you'd probably get dismissed as a teacher for. hmmm. : it is… my daughter is in third grade right now, and she's not allowed to play tag in the playground. it's too dangerous. so i am not, you know, we didn’t do anything insane in high school back in the eighties hmm, but nowadays i'm sure that they can't do half of that stuff. the chemicals are too dangerous.  : you know, we got to—we got to do a lot of cool things. i really—i really enjoyed my chemistry and hmm, my chemistry class and i took summer school chemistry in high school, just cause i wanted to get ahead and thought\  : i don't remember that teacher’s name, sorry but… (-laughs-) you know, it was a—a class where you—you got a vile of an unknown. : and then you had to using chemistry, figure out what was in that bile.  : and so qualitative chemistry and i loved it. it was very, you know… mix this, if it precipitates, it might be these ten things, but this one doesn't dissolve. this one does. this one hmm, will turn color if you add an acid to it. so you—you worked out all of the chemistry of that, that—that was kind of early training in the methods of science.  : and then this professor, [name 2: professor’s name], in—at university of illinois, was the expert in cocaine and amphetamine. still is.  : hmm. he was a very good mentor in terms of, you know, “if you want to answer a question, map out a good experiment and go do it.”  : hmm. that anything is possible, i should say. and another big influence on me was a professor who is still at uc irvine, [name 3: another professor’s name], who is a electrophysiologist. teaches a hmm, course in how to do electrophysiology; and his basic teaching method is to show you the equipment, show you the basic concept and then just say, “go figure it out.”  : and you would figure out with a lab partner. you know, this is impossible, you can't. i can't patch clamp an ion channel on a—on a single neuron. you know i'm a grad student, this is impossible. but as you piece together and figure out how to get the noise out of the equipment, and how to get the right settings on the amplifier or track down problems.  : through this, and this was a course you would stay till ten or eleven o’ clock at night, because you had to figure stuff out. he really taught me that actually if you put your mind to it, you can figure—you can figure out anything you need to figure out.  : so that you know i’m—i'm not an expert in diphtheria toxin. but you know, you read about it, figure it out, read some more, figure out how to do it safely without killing yourself, (-laughs-) and go do the experiment so… : yes. : hmm. : it's that small. yeah.  : poll stretcher. : yeah. yeah. : that is! so you know, i now do more animal, i'm on a larger scale of animal behavior, animal hmm, cognition and brain injury. or locomotion and spinal cord injury. and then there is the cellular component with the stem cells, but it's—it's not at that refined, super refined level of physics and chemistry where i think you can get the answer. hmm, the answer is clear.  : at that level where, as in biological systems, not every rat behaves the same.  : hmm, my student is doing a study right now, where the cell survival is much lower than in regular experiments. we've done and we don't know why.  : but he gets behavioral improvement. so now we got to go back and piece together, you know, what was the cell survival curve over time, and does the dose of the cells that survive correlate with the behavioral things that we saw while the animals were alive. and there is a… much more layers of complexity there, that—mean you never get the definitive answer.  : the living—living systems are complicated.  : hmm i think yeah, it’s—it’s—it's two-fold. it takes you away from your experiment, but on the other hand it forces you to be clear in what you—what you think is true.  : and i think that's actually very useful. so i find when i'm trying to ex…either teach in the class, you better know hmm, the ins and outs of your topic, and it forces you to know. if you can't explain something to a new person in the field, then you don't understand it as well as you think you did.  : which is fine, and that shows you either your own weakness or what area of the field we don't understand. you know so if i'm teaching about stem cell biology, and we're not sure if the cell line we're using hmm, has the same properties as the last cell line we're using. is that because i just don't know the answer, or because scientists don't know what makes a good cell line or what makes a bad cell line? so having to teach people forces you to get down to the nitty gritty of what—what do we know, what do we think we know, and what do we not have a clue about.  : that's quite useful. and then also, i find when you’re talking to grad students they'll ask the question that you think you know the answer to, and then you are starting to answer, you realize actually i'm not so sure i know the answer to that. and you go look it up and talk to them about it. nobody really knows the answer. that's a good question that you've—you've—you've centered on something we don't know the answer to it, and it’s curious enough; that should be something that we ought to pursue. so it gives you ideas about what—what to do next. : by mentoring other people.  : i… well i… one of the common piece of advice i harp on them is, of course, to read the literature (-laughs-). but i find that ironic, because i think—my belief is half the literature is wrong. you know, and—and—and we can have arguments whether 60% is wrong or 40%, but it’s—it's a big number. you know it's not that 80% out there is accurate. there's—there's mistakes or inaccuracies. or hmm, there is not enough room to put in all the details, so you can't actually replicate the project. so i think my advice to students is to read up all you can about the field but do it, do it in a—do it with a grain of salt.  : but that's—that’s not easy to do. : so when you start reading a bunch of literature in this—in a new area, you start noticing trends. well sometimes those trends are because we're building upon something, and sometimes it's group think, and\ : hmm you really have to guard against. well, do we—do we know this because we've definitively shown it experimentally?  : or do we think we know this but it… really no one has tested it? : no. : oh well i… so i am familiar with that paper. i don’t know—i didn't know its name so… : yeah. : so it's a complicated thing because it’s—it’s a… i think a lot of you know most is 51%\  : \or higher (-laughs-). and so i agree with him, most is false. hmm is it false because hmm, incompetence? hmm… fraud? hmm—hmm it's actually correct but wasn't documented right? i mean it's complicated.   : hmm so the problem is… in—in order to get a graduate degree, you know, you are mentoring these students, saying “well, you need to publish things in the literature, and if you publish something that’s completely in left field you won't get it published.” you know so even though you might be right, hmm if it's—if it too bucks the trend, hmm maybe you won’t get it published. or you will gonna have to do really good definitive experiments that show, you know, everybody said a but i—i—i tested a and it's not a. it's b.  : and then you’re gonna have to show it’s b three times over, because you know, you are gonna be bucking the reviewers who think they’ve grown up in a system that says it's a. so it's complicated. but you know, on the other hand, if you follow literature too much, then you won't be creative. : hmm you'll be doing the next little, hmm you know, we call it pebble stacking versus boulder chucking for those terms. : so hmm i… my innate—my innate instinct is to be a—a pebble stacker. you know, we have this piece of information, but we don't have all the information. let's do, let's add the next piece.  : and you can make a career on that. but if all you do is hmm, stack pebbles\  : \you’re never gonna have any big discoveries. and the big discoveries are really with move the… oh, wait a minute, not all of rna is coded. really? not all dna is—is coded, hmm you know, that was heresy. hmm maybe there was actually a piece of mendelian genetics, that what your parents were exposed to alters their dna and you inherit that. that was heresy. i laughed at it myself. now we know about epigenetics, and you know, it’s rewriting things. but those are—those—that's boulder chucking. coming up with something very, very new, and you know, that's hard to do.  : you know i wish i would have the secret to that. you know, then i would have ten great graduate students that are now all full professors somewhere. (-laughs-) : that's… : yeah.  : don’t want to be underneath the boulder when somebody chucks it. : wow that's a loaded question. so please look away, [interviewer 2]. : hmm my bias would be to say, i think—i would think there is a difference and that women are more creative than men. hmm, so on the positive side, i—i—maybe there is a difference. women are allowed to be more collaborative, hmm men… and men fit that type by being less collaborative, i suppose, or being more competitive. and i think in this age of science, competitiveness is not bad. it brings hmm, new ideas; it brings competition. there's positives to that. but on the other hand, i think science nowadays is really moving toward collaborative stuff, where you need—you can't be an expert in everything. and so you need somebody who is creative enough to have a good idea, but is collaborative and has the skills to say, “well, i don't know imaging well enough, so i'll pull this person in; i don't know the neuro-psych part, so i'll pull that person in.” and you have to be comfortably enough saying, “i'm not the expert in everything to do that.”  : i think women are better trained for that. or men are, that's trained out of men. hmm so if i had to guess, you know, i don't know, i will have to—i will have to look at your data after the study is over. i would—i would actually guess that creativity in a big c sort of way is evenly distributed. there is, you know, no male, female difference to it. it's more how biased are we to see it or not.  : are we giving credit for creativity?  : hmm and different kinds of creativity.  : i just see in my—my own little world. you know, my wife and some of my colleagues at the stem cell center, that the women faculty are equally creative, if not more creative than the men so\  : that would be a guess. i haven't—i haven’t studied the data on that.  : hmm well so… so there's an impact. it’s a—it's a negative one. hmm but it—it made me who i am. it’s my parents are catholic. they're very religious and i'm a nonbeliever. hmm and that took— (clearing throat) and—and i'm a nonbeliever, because if you can't prove god exists, then he doesn't.  : hmm you know, sorry. hmm he'll forgive me later when—when we chat. but—but hmm it… so i—i—i need to see data.  : that's—that’s who i am. so i—i guess it was in high school. i'm trying to remember what year, my junior year of high school, so i must have been 17.  : that's about right. by the—by time i was 17, and i was forced to go through first communion, and hmm catholic school. i went—i went to a public school, but i had to go to sunday school.  : and i just didn't believe any—anymore, didn't believe this thought. so eventually, i confronted my parents who had caught me not going to church on sundays. and i said, “well, i'm—i’m not going, because there is no god. i have bad news for you. there is no god.” and so i was disowned from my family when i was junior in high school, i'm gonna say. so it was a—it was a big event. you won't be going to college because my parents were upper middle class. hmm the applications were already in, and there will be no money coming from my family. so i just had senior year of high school, i… “give up” is the wrong word. i went to high school. i—i had places lined up for where i was gonna live when i turned 18, which would have been half way through my—so hmm through my senior year of high school, cause i was going to be kicked out of the house. hmm and on the upside as a rebellious teenager, my response was “well, if you disinherited me, and you kicked me out of the house, but you can't make me leave till i'm 18.”  : i am just going to stay here and eat your food. and when you want me to mow the lawn, the answer is no. and when you want me to shovel the snow, the answer is no. and i'll just be as defiant a youth as hmm, as you could possibly want. hmm so this, hmm, this went on for—i don’t—maybe half a year. quite some time. my—my mother in particular… well actually no, i wouldn't credit my mother. both of them could be horrendously stubborn.  : and i'm sure i inherited stubbornness from my parents. so hmm, this was a total impasse and at one point, i—i mocked my father and said, “i’m—i’m sure that any, no priest will tell you what you’re doing is—is right. you know, and if they do, then your religion is even sicker than i thought.” and my dad argued with me, “you want a bet? you know let's go. let's go down and talk to the… to the—i don't remember the guy’s name—you know, the head priest. and so hmm, i don't know why i agreed to get in the car, but we did, and we drove to the church and went to the hmm, the priest. and there was a—at the time there was a young hip priest, and there was the old geezer guy who was horribly strict, and of course who opens the door of the old geezer. hmm and my dad who knows—knows him of course, and so he tells him we have a problem. the guy talked to me alone, and he talked to my dad alone. and he brings us both together and he says, “hmmm [name 4: participant’s father’s name],” my father’s name is [name 4]; he says, “john, faith is a gift from god, and your son, he does not have this gift.”  : “and it's not for you to decide—”  : “—what god gives your son or doesn't. you have to accept him as he is.” and then miraculously, “okay, hop in the car, son. come on home!”  : “you are—you’re my son again.”  : so that—that was a very… that was my science hmm, getting in the way. or you know, defining who i am. i am… i don't believe—i don’t believe unless i can see it. and i’m not—i'm not gonna believe your religion.  : but that was a very defining battle i would say.  : (-laughs-) this is—this is… i was—i was not going to agree. that is—that is true. and that was…   : so i applied to mit and yale, and then i stopped because this happened. i—i stopped applying.  : and hmm, [university 1: where the participant pursued undergraduate education], which is where i ended up getting stuck going, hmm a fine school, [university 1], was… i didn't even apply there. i was an [state 1: participant’s state of residency] state resident and i had hmm, taken the merit tests required in high school. so i—i was given a guaranteed admission.  : so i got to go to college, at least on time i would say. i'm sure that after we reconciled, i could have taken a year off maybe—although that wasn't done back then—and apply to college. but i just i went to illinois, cause that was the only option i had before me.  : turns out this was a great place to do neuropsychology and philosophy. it was a great school. i'm—i’m glad i went there but i never\ : who knows what path you'll take?  : i got stuck at [university 2] for two years. (-laughs-) : yeah. i was a hmm… [university 2]\  : they are, they… exactly. so when you are a—a junior of faculty, you are an instructor\  : \and the idea is that if you really perform well, you might someday get to be a real faculty. but the—the tenure rate at [university 2] is very, very low.   : and my wife was a post doc at [university 2].  : so that actually is an amusing side story, which you can do with as you will. i was senior to my wife in graduate school by a year or two. so i was a post doc at [city 1: where the participant pursued post doc], while she was finishing up. i got this instructorship at [university 2], which is really a glorified post doc, but it’s—it was a faculty position. so she gets a post doc at [university 2] as well, so we both moved to [city 2: where the participant stayed temporarily with his wife]. and we interviewed at lots of places, and the best offer—we explained to the guy we want to both be in [city 2] because we're both scientists, we're both in the similar fields and we want to be in a place where there's lots of opportunity for us, cause this is where we’ll—we'll move to, you know, if we get these job offers. so we were offered these jobs at the [institute 1] institute, is that [institute 1]? no that's a\ : no. [institute 1], that's in [city 3: where institute 1 is located].  : we were not offered a job at [institute 1], that comes later.  : so i have a bad memory. so we were offered jobs at [institute 2] of [university 2]. okay so we sell our condo in [state 2: where the participant used to live], and we move to [city 2] in a blizzard.  : and we get there, and the first day of work is january 3rd or something. we drive to [institute 2], and there is a sign on the door saying come to the informational meeting about the closing of [institute 2].  : that was day one on our job. : and it turns out—this is why i got [institute 1] mixed up—the head of the psychiatry program there, which you should not publish that one part. i don't want to, you know, speak ill of my—my former peers, hmm but [name 5: an employer] recruited me to—to [institute 2]. and i don't know if you know his name.  : okay, so [name 5] recruited us to hmm… hmm [institute 2]. : he was in negotiations with [institute 1] at the time.  : and we told him. so i am mad at him, don't get me wrong.  : we told [name 5] we want to move to [city 2] because [city 2] is where it's at, and we like your lab too. don't get me wrong, but we want to be in [city 2].  : well he was already planning to go to new york.  : and so we arrive. it turns out [university 2] didn't close hmm, [institute 2].  : but we went through the turmoil of the, you know, closing, know firing people and all that stuff. and it was complicated. and i mean [university 2], who is incompetent, they had given [name 5]… you know, “oh we forgot to give you your vivarium bill for the last two years. happen to have 180 grand?” and you know who's got that money laying around in a grant. so was it. : so i would have gone there.  : that bridge was burned when you go to [institute 2]. and turned down the other one. so i could have gone to [institute 3: a different lab].  : so we arrive and within months, [name 5] is like “by the way we're moving to [city 3] and you’re invited.” come on, you know, you all come on with. and we said, we don't want to go to [city 3]. i—i'm sure if i had been recruited there, it would have been a different story. this was not, (-laughs-) not at all what we planned.  : so while that disaster was going on, [name 6: someone injured] was injured in a horseback riding accident. : and [university 3: where the participant worked], who [name 7: participant’s wife] and i both worked at previously, [university 3] was looking to expand spinal cord injury research, because [name 8: a donor] donated to [university 3]. so my wife was recruited back to [university 3]. now she’s the more important senior person, and i am just the caboose. and so i followed her because i really love her. (-laughs-) : so we moved back to [city 1].  : but it was not, not planned.  : random. there’s lots of random events.  : yeah, where? who knows? who knows. : that's very predictive. : well so, i would say for me, i think about it long and hard. hmm but if it doesn't get produced, what's the point of thinking about it? so i really think… “i don't think you can pull them apart” would be my—my cued answer to that. is it so my wife and i, we walk to work which is a 15—if she is walking it's 15 minutes, if i am walking it's 20. hmm but so when we jog to work, when she is in the lead, we talk about science and the—the experiments in the day. and when we walk home we're talking about it. and when the daughter goes to bed, we don't. we try not to talk about it during dinner hour and hmm, kids’ homework, but we're always thinking about the next big thing. or how to fix the last broken thing. it's always a ruminating, you know, what are we missing, how could we do this better, what's the next element.  : but on the other hand there's always the look we have been, you know. we have all the data to put together a paper on cell dose, why the hell haven't we put that paper together yet? so there's always a juggling act of hmm, thinking of the new thing.  : and you know, your publications are several years, and not just a year of you submitted. it gets reviewed, and you know nothing is happening in that year. on top of that, there is a year of… “well this is interesting information, but it's not the blockbuster thing so it— it's got to get published sometime, but hmm, it might get put aside while we are working on something really cool.”  : so there's always a juggling act of hmm, hmm what—what's new, and how long do you think about it to—to do the experiment. is it in our world, and i think there is a slight truth for human experiments as well. it's going to take so much effort to recruit the thirty, and the thirty and the thirty, that you better have designed what you’re going to analyze and how you’re going to recruit. you gotta do a lot of work behind the scenes before you get to the— “now i'm just doing the… i'm on the final leg, i'm—i’m collecting the data now.”  : animal experiments that we do are hmm, maybe six months of cell prep, cell manipulations and things. hmm breeding of animals, if you have an animal that needs to have a specific gene knocked in or knocked out.  : you got to breed them. that might take you a year.  : if you think to yourself, “i want to understand a question that we have now.” when you do brain—when a brain injury happens, our oligodendrocyte progenitors, are they selectively vulnerable? so after repeated brain injuries, we know that there's a loss of white matter\  : \well why is that lost? is that lost because neurons die? and i'm sure some do. neurons die, so there is no axons; therefore white matter shrinks.  : and white matter shrinks, but has nothing to do with the number of progenitors and the number of oligodendrocytes. or what you need, are the number of oligodendrocytes selectively vulnerable to—to head injury? so we're going to be breeding mice that have an on-off switch for oligodendrocyte progenitors, or a marker that shows if i give them a drug, any newly born oligodendrocyte i can track\  : \and then give head injuries. well, to design that experiment, which—which mouse… am i gonna breed, am i gonna breed ones that we can knock out progenitors or selectively trace progenitors? will those cross breed with each other? all those logistics had to be figured out.  : and then you have to grow the cells. it… this could be two—two or three years from now, before i know the answer to that experiment, and then another year before i get it published.  : so it's a very slow process, and you just you have to be determined. i think there's a—a lot of just maybe stubbornness, stub determination. you know, look i am going to publish this thing. we have a paper from five years ago that's going to be summited to probably six different journals. the grad student who did the work is now a post doc and wants to quit science, and i don't blame her.   : because her—she has a very cool finding. but it's too… you know, it’ too out there. it's too creative.  : and the reviewers don't understand it. they don't like it. they don’t understand. : and so it has been, we'll add another experiment to show the next step, we'll add another step to the step. and you know, that's what i fight with my wife about all the time. now this paper has got seven big concepts in it, not three, and two is probably the maximum that anyone can absorb. so how do you piece these all together?  : and get the—get the story out.  : but we're not gonna—we're not going to give up. that paper is going to get published someday.  : but you know, i don't know when that day is. (-laughs-) : right.  : yes, i do.  : i would like to put an advertisement out for my iphone now.  : yes. without evernote, the iphone, ipad, laptop synchronizing\  : \i would be lost. i suspect that you’re going to find that, in—in the scanner that my working memory is atrocious.  : (-laughs-) perhaps damaged by too many chemicals. i don't know. hmm but i—i—i think i'm going to guess my working memory is hmm, on the lower, you know. is a standard deviation below normal, certainly not one or two above normal.  : hmm so we'll see because of the—the mean things [interviewer 2] did to me. : and what we'll do in the scanner. but so… : yeah. so now we'll know.   : so i—i… the theory that, you know, if you could hold eight things or twelve things in working memory, as opposed to the standard five to seven, and maybe i'm at three to five, hmm the more you could hold, yeah, the more angles, the more possibilities you might have for creativity. hmm, i don't know.  : i kind of think, and—and i know my and i… i don't know the answers, but my brain works differently than my wife's.  : we're in, you know, nearly identical fields. and she will know the facts, and quote the author, and remember figure seven of the paper.  : and i just have a gestalt. i—the word i use is a gestalt feeling. and i have to go track that down and see that it’s correct. but i just have the hmm, gestalt feelings about how things are, what i read, and… but i just—i don't have good enough working memory to have all those elements. i have to go back and drag them up through evernote or something. : is there a gestalt center? : okay because i… (-laughs-) i’m gonna\ : uh huh. : right.  : hmm i—i guess it would almost… if you put it in those terms, it almost would define how i try to think.  : that hmm, when i'm trying to be a professor, a—a—a scientist in my trade, hmm that the whole point is to not… if—if you only think of what is known, you’re not gonna get anywhere. so you need to—you need to quash your beliefs in what is, what is the dogma let's say, and see what, see where those threads lead you. hmm so i—i’m, i—i think inhibition… i don't—i don’t know, you don't need to be a crazy disinhibited hmm, yeah, extrovert about it.  : this is—this is an internal thing of thinking in your own mind. do we really know this, how do we know this, hmm why do i believe it and ques—? i mean you know, it's kind of a frustrating life because you’re questioning, you are always questioning things. but that's—that's nature of being a doubting tom, i suppose.  : wow. what's the secret to being creative?  : “the one thing.” yeah.  : there are other things.  : yeah, i think being contrarian. hmm not being, so it, you know, i'm not sure. i'm, you know, going to wish that my daughter has the same belief system, you know, cause it's not easy. hmm that to be creative, you—to be scientifically creative, i'll put it that way, you need to be always pushing the boundaries and doubting, doubting what we know. hmm thinking of better ways to ask a question. and that's a… it's—it’s… you have to be willing to live in that domain of frustration. or of—of ignorance that, you know, how do i, why do i think this works the way that—that it does, the brain works the way that it does, the hmm injury and regeneration from injury does or doesn't work. hmm, and well if you think about that too deeply, you realize that we don't know a lot. you know we—what we think is dogma maybe, maybe is the opposite of that, and that's what's blocking our progress. hmm so it's a—it's a never ending hmm, struggle. : okay. : (-laughs-) : very nice.  : ok.  : just the single most, the single thing?  : mhm. probably the work i did as a post doc.  : so at the time, it was sort of early days when genome sequences were becoming available. new sequencing technology and such. and so there was sort of a completely new type of data that hadn't really been available before.   : yeah, during the post doc here at ucla. yeah. so at the time you know there was a lot of open questions for how to use this new type of data. and so i think there was a period when together with, you know, a couple of other post docs, we did some creative things on how to, how to use this kind of data. came up with some ideas on basically how to look at the structural of these genomes and determine which genes within these genomes were co-evolving. so rather than thinking of evolution as occurring on a single gene over time you know with mutations and things, we could study how groups of genes, pairs of genes, were evolving together across these organisms. and that gave us insights on not just the evolution, but also on their function. the notion was that the genes that co-evolve are probably functionally coupled. functionally related and that's why there is some evolutionary pressure to keep their evolution coupled. : i mean, i think the insight just comes from abstract thinking more than from biological intrusion. i come from a physics background, right. so i didn't have much biological intuition about evolution or biology in general. but, you know, working sort of you know with data and physics and modeling and things, you are able to, you know, think of things abstractly. so, abstracted from their biological context. so you can start to ask questions, what data, you know, that other people haven't thought of yet because the data is pretty new. and those new ways to query the data give you some interesting insights.  : yeah so that was one example where we sort of, we were able to extract this data in, on genomes and represent it in very simple forms, just as binary data showing whether certain genes were present or absent, in the organisms. and then once we've made that abstraction, it's easy to use other techniques to try to group together genes and understand how, you know, they have similar patterns represented in that fashion and that gives you insights on this notion of co-evolution. and, you know, i think that in general as new data types are being generated, one has to abstract them and represent them and then one can questions, you know, sort of mine the data in ways which relates to new types of question one can ask about the system.     : in my context, it means having a mathematical representation for the data, right. so, an abstraction is a - you can think of as a geometrical or a data structure or something that can be formulated in a mathematical fashion.    : yeah no i think i tend to visualize it. so i tend to visualize the patterns and kind of the operations one can do on these patterns in terms of sort of mathematical operations that one can perform on these.   : but it is pretty visual, i think that's the way i always think about it.  : bfg? : -laughs-  : uh, but yeah, a graph – i mean a graph is one way to think about it, but really it's, it's sort of the type of data. you know, the way you represent the data, right. so it's not just the actual instance of the data, but it's the abstraction of it. so how does one think of it? does it stay in a matrix, is it a vector, is it a tensor?  : is it something else right? : how do you think about it? and once you have that representation of the data, then, you know, you immediately think of what kind of operations you can do on that type of data and then that translates into the kind of questions you can ask about it.   : well, i think there is definitely a lot of, you know, the traditional biologists will not have that background and now a days there is more and more people moving from you know they call it quantitative backgrounds for math, computer science, physics, into biology and then the difference is the physicist actually - so the computer scientist, the mathematician thinks of it purely abstractly whereas the physicist tries to think of it abstractly but with a connection to the physical reality. -laughs- so i think the physicist thinks about it a little differently. everybody comes at it with these slightly different views but so the physics is sort of a hybrid where you, you do abstract the reality, but you still have some sort of physical, you're still trying to relate it back to the physical world in some sense. : i mean i wasn't particularly precocious, but it always came pretty easily to me. so i did well in math and in science. then it came from my dad is also a scientist. probably genetic is also a component from just, you know, being around that environment.  : i was at high risk. -laughs-  : although, so my siblings didn't follow the same path. so, it was certainly not a pre-destination of any sort. but yeah, no i think i, i always found that, you know, trying to understand the world in a quantitative, geometric way is sort of just the way i thought about things.   : he's a physicist.  : mhm.  : well he was here at ucla, now's he's a meritus and he spends most of his time up at stanford.  : one of their labs.  : well i mean he was – he obviously exposed me to this world of science through, you know, occasionally i would go to the labs and here seminars and things like that.  : so i would see him sort of, you know, writing mathematical equations. -laughs- : it didn't seem, you know, it seemed like something you would want to understand cause it seemed so foreign at the beginning so there is a certain curiosity to understand what he's doing and what it all means.  : well i mean my mentors over the years have had big impacts on my careers. from post-doctoral mentor to phd mentor to, you know, someone like professors. you know obviously the ones that had the most impact were the ones i spent the most time with which were my phd and post-doctoral advisors.  : i mean, i think what the main thing they transmitted was that this whole thing happens only if you have a lot of freedom to think about things. so, you know, if you’re an environment where you're told exactly what to do, then there is not a lot of room for creativity –laughs- or these kind of things. so, you know, the unique aspect of the education we give students is that we actually - well at least not everyone but a lot of us - we give them a lot of room to really take ownership of problems and have the freedom to explore things and spend a long time doing it, years doing it. so that's kind of a unique environment where you can really explore and try new things and you're not constrained to do very specific tasks.  : yeah, absolutely that's always the case in most of the work i've done. there's no correct answer. it's just a question of trying to formulate the problem in a way where you can try and come up with some answers and then find an efficient way of doing it. so it's basically how do you model or mine the data, right. so it's all about implementation and doing it efficiently so then you can ask new questions that you couldn't otherwise because you need some kind of structured formalism to be able to ask the questions it's not/     : /it's not a simple question. it requires all the computational mathematical infrastructure for you to be able to ask the question.  : right.  : exactly, right, right. yeah. : that's exactly right.  : -laughs- :  in life or in my research? or whatever? : i mean in life i haven't encountered a lot of obstacles. things have gone pretty smoothly. -laughs- : in research, the obstacles are mainly the relevance, you know, trying to come up, you know you can get lost in these worlds of abstraction and academia and do things that seem interesting, but in the end, turn out not to be terribly relevant. so i think the biggest challenge, if not obstacle, is to try to make your work relevant to others, right. and not just towards something that is elegant, but at some level not very useful. : right. exactly. right. : right. and that i think is, you know, when you're young, you're good at the innovation but you're not as good at the utility necessarily. -laughs- unless you happen to chance on something terribly useful but, with age, maybe you get a better intuition on what's, what's useful. : i'm not saying my work is becoming more useful, but at least i have, i can - i sort of use that as a criteria more than i used to.  : is it actually going to be useful or not.  : i think i have more of a sense of what's useful. and the danger obviously is that you could skew too much in that direction and then you lose the innovation and you just have useful but non-innovative work. so the balance is challenging.  : i mean, i think what drives me is every time i see, you know, data giving me insights into something, it's kind of a charge, right? it sounds like you've made a connection and it keeps you motivated. so every time i see a student analyzing, doing some new project, analyzing some new data we collected or obtained and getting an insight out of it, that's really exciting right?   : so usually the spark of excitement often comes from me and not always from the student. -laughs- but again, i think the excitement for me is sort of seeing the data in a new way, right. seeing the problem in a new way, right. it's not so much confirming something that is already known or just generating new data, it's sort of that combination, where the combination of the data and sort of the way you're looking at it gives you this new insight.   : to me what really, maybe that's my bias as a physicist, but what really makes it more exciting for me is coming up with an insight that sort of makes complicated systems seem simpler than it is, right. so if you can find a way to interpret the data that you're collecting, that makes it the underlying understanding of the data simpler than it was before.  : then that, i find very exciting.  : that sort of/ : yeah, the condensation where now you have a true insight that it's not really as hopelessly complicated as you thought it was. there is something, an underlying model there, that can explain that. :  yeah then well you're sort of, i am less excited by – i mean it certainly provokes thinking about it and so you see it as a challenge, right? how are you going to try to understand that? : well i think sort of when, when that typically happens when you first approach the problem, it seems hopelessly complicated. and you're sort of taking stabs in the dark on how to process, how to understand this. and then, over time, as you build intuition and as you sort of try to understand what are the forces driving these complicated processes, then you occasionally can simplify the problem. so to me, it's sort of about simplifying, but yet explaining the world. so, coming up with some models that really allow you to understand complexity, but you know, the models themselves are simpler.    : yeah, exactly, right.  : well i mean there's been the practical training in the methodology of the field right. mathematical concepts, the physical concepts... but i think maybe the things that have struck me are sort of seeing this process at work when i interact with them where i came in confused and not understanding the complexity of something and they were able to distill it to a much simpler explanation. you know seeing that process at work – and then that kind of rubs off, and you think, ah i should be doing that.   : you try. –laughs-   : yeah, i think, in sometimes it can only be done by example right? so you interact with the students, you're thinking about the problem and you're sharing how you think about it. you know everybody is different. so maybe they don't think the same way you think and that process won't get through to them but some do and they sort of see it at work right and so then probably inspire them to keep going and keeping at it.   : do they think differently...  : i have limited data. -laughs- : no, i mean, there has been a fair number of women in my lab as well. so i haven't noticed any general trends of thinking differently. i mean, there is so much individual variation.  : i haven't noticed any patterns/  : /between men and women that are stronger than the individual variation between students.     : do men and women or colleagues in general?  : between the students, or between my colleagues? : mhm. well i think there are big differences. i think that in my field in biology, the typical way a biologist approaches science is very different from the way a physicist approaches science, right. very striking differences. so, you know, a biologist kind of revels in the details of the system, the complexity and trying to, you know, find one new piece of information to add to – but the problem is the system becomes more complicated over time as people add more information.   : so to a physicist that is kind of frustrating. you don't get a lot of pleasure from adding yet another data point to the big complex structure that's being built. so, you know, i think i tend to approach things very differently from my colleagues.    : right. : right, right. : right, right to be able to - i mean in order to ask questions, sometimes you have to do that. you have to dispense with all the details and think of the problem even more in a general way, and then you can start to ask different questions that you couldn't otherwise.   : my mom obviously had a big influence too. -laughs- not just my dad. : so my mom was trained more in the arts. she was sort of comparative arts. she was a real expert in sort of the history of art, and so she took us to many, many museums and churches and so that whole aspect i think had a big, big impact on me as well. learning, being exposed to art, you know, especially in italy where it's so everywhere.   :  so understanding the history of art and architecture and painting and things like that. i think that had a – and so i think the two things are connected right i mean the – you know, in some ways, the art of that period, the renaissance, was also about abstraction right? being able to abstract the world, create a model of the world in your art.  : then, you know, changed later movements and things. but that was kind of the art really that i was exposed to more. so, and yeah, i mean, you learn to understand how the two things are connected, right. how the abstraction of the world in the painting is in some way comparable to the abstraction of the world in math.  : well i think you know it's, i haven't thought about it explicitly, but you know, so the intuition you have for these things is somehow connected. so when you see a beautiful painting, what makes it beautiful right? there's something about it that triggers that sense, right. and that's related to the same sense you have when you have a beautiful insight about a problem. right, so the two things are at some level connected.  : well yeah, i mean i think it's what we have been talking about. i think it's the ability to abstract and understand the problem. so basically, how do you take something complicated and represent it in a way that's much simpler but gives you insight on the problem. right and so... if you think about the history of art in some way, a lot of art was motivated by similar concepts right? how do you, how do you represent something in your art work and simplify it. give you insight into the world and what makes the world/  : i mean, the work, the art work that comes to mind is a lot was the one from the italian renaissance, right, when they were doing exactly that. they were learning how to depict the world on a canvas and so a lot of study of geometry, perspective.  : you know colors and things. and, you know, it wasn't, you know, how do you represent the world in that way and they came up for the techniques for doing that, a lot of mathematical techniques.   : -laughs- i mean the ones that are the most representative of this perspective are the paintings from the 1400's from like florence and things where they were learning how to depict sort of scenes of cities and they had these sort of idealized cities where they were - their view of what you know they were trying to depict biblical scenes and things so they had, they had these idealized view of what the world was like then.   : back in biblical times, but it was also representing the current times. it was kind of a mixture of this sort of idealized view of what their current architecture was/ : /but pretending what it might of been back then : so the study, the geometry of these cities  : specifically people like [artist 1]. : that was sort of very common artistic view at the time.  : -laughs- who knows.  : a lot of generations.  : yeah, i mean... : right. right. right. it's possible. who knows? -laughs- : the way i think about it is, the rationality allows you to have the language, right. so to create the structure that allows you then to ask the problems but, but the intuition is what actually generates the question and the solution, so if it were just the rationality you would just be able to build a very nice framework, but you wouldn't know what to do with it whereas, it's the combination of the two that lets you not just you know have the right structure but also then be able to probe it and ask interesting questions.  : well i mean, i see the intuition as something you kind of can't control very much. i mean once, once, once the landscape is there and then it sort of just happens, right. you ask - you have an insight, you have some intuition about hmm maybe we could do that with this or maybe this is a way to abstract the data.   : yeah, i mean you know we don't - i don't have a lot of external, physical structures i can rely on, so it's really about trying to abstract the whole thing in your mind. i mean we obviously have the computers to actually do the calculation and to view the output, but the actual construct is completely abstract, right. so yeah, i mean that just persists that's from constantly, you know, doing the same thing over and over again in slightly different ways. your brain is always primed to view the data and the world in that way.  : no, i mean i don’t think there is any specific process other than just constantly being re-exposed to the same types of data, types of questions and... : yeah i think that's the main thing. yeah. : right. yeah, the exposure – the systematic exposure to this.  : mhm. yeah, we work mostly on data that comes out of sequencers. yeah either dna, rna, and other variants of that.  : yeah, i mean certainly you begin to recognize, i mean sort of the challenge in our field is always the signal versus noise right so you know. and i think that one is the difficult thing for younger students to appreciate when they're sort of mucking around in the noise versus when they you know are actually seeing some signal and, and i think the exposure that, that i have and other people have, you are involved in many different projects, many different types of data over many years. you get - start to get a sense for when you're actually seeing a real signal versus not.    : so that's important.  : -laughs- yeah, i think it's applicable to a lot of situations. and it's hard, right. every time you get into a new area, you have a new type of data. it's hard to figure out, you know, where the signal and where the noise is.  : -laughs- : right, right. it's a big problem,  : well a lot of it is driven by practical aspects and then sort of you try to mold them to your interests, but a lot of it has to do with collaborations, being a more computational person and more interacting with groups that generates the data. although, we do some of that in house as well. so just sort of the practical notion of who you're collaborating with. and then the other practical notion of what is being funded, you know. -laughs- you need to get some money to keep the lab going so you have to work on things that are fundable or are funded. but then, within this context you can always, again this notion of freedom where you can take a problem and sort of steer in it in a direction that's interesting to me.    : yeah, i mean every day, you know, i walk the dog or i commute back and forth and i mean a good fraction of the time thinking about some problem some data related thing.  : -laughs- just by not interfering with...  : exactly. : i mean first of all a lot of times you have intuitions or thoughts about things when you're listening to a seminar because i'm sort of semi-listening and then sort of dozing off and my brain starts to wander and kind of that environment is always sometimes very productive because you're kind of stimulated in that your being exposed to some scientific notion, but maybe you sort of lost interest and drifted so you're starting to connect it to things you're doing and that can create interesting new connections.  : right, but i think, but somehow, i think sub-consciously you're trying to connect too. you're hearing, you got something out of the seminar, but maybe you started to lose interest or understanding and then so you gradually start to see if that's relevant what you're doing and gradually creates connections, right. you're sort of trying to bridge the two things inevitably.  : -laughs- : exactly. that's when you start to get interesting ideas, right.  : i don't know if there's regular periodicity, but definitely there are periods when you are more engaged and having more ideas than others. uh, depends on you know sort of external things.  : yeah, i mean the fact that the rest of your life is not worrying is a good thing, right. so if things are going well there is nothing that is pre-occupying you, that creates a good environment for being able to think about these more abstract things.   : yeah, seven to eight hours.  : i mean, i'll wake up in the middle of the night often, but then fall back asleep.  : you know, i use to be more of a night person and now sort of my schedule has shifted. so, i've become more of a morning person as i grow older.  : yeah just because of my necessities. i just have to wake up early.  : to deal with things.  : yeah. yeah. mainly the kids and their school, all that stuff.  : they're in fifth and seventh grade.  : uh huh.  : wow.  : yeah so yeah that keeps you... : uh huh. : no. -laughs- : uh huh.  : uh huh. : hmm.  : -laughs- : exactly. : right. : mhm. : yeah, yeah no absolutely. it's full time. : yeah.  : no absolutely. i see that in my students. the productivity and the creativity are tightly linked, right? i mean, in all these processes you have to overcome little hurdles sequentially to get some results and so if you takes you ten per cent longer than the other guy to overcome each hurdle, that kind of adds up over time and you don’t - you can't solve as many problems and it's unlikely you will hit on, you know, something.      : very interesting. and then, there is also the fact that it's just, there is a stochastic element to all of this where it's hard to predict the one really important problem right from the beginning and find a really creative solution that's not so, you know, being able to sample more things increases the odds that you do something interesting.  : mhm. : yeah no absolutely. yeah. yeah. yeah. it's good, i mean, you know, when we look back at what we've done we sort of look at our publications, which represent completed tasks, right, which are a good proxy for exactly that, right.   : then we can start to do new things and work on new projects.  :  sorry, i think this is my wife trying to... let me just get it, one second. (speaking on phone) : yeah. yeah, i came when i was ten.  : i had actually. we lived in england a couple of years.  : yeah.  : i spent sort of first and second grade in england.   : up through fifth grade.  : mhm. oh alright. interesting.  : well my wife is italian.  : yeah.  : yeah a little bit but mostly english.      : but they hear a lot of italian at home. that's what we speak. : no, i mean english at this point is my primary language.  : especially professionally.  : but i mean it's easy for me to switch back and forth.  : um, does it help me? it helps me with certain you know, the roots of words. -laughs- : things like that, right. knowing italian can help you understand certain words.  : i know a little bit of french. i spent some time in france.  : mhm.  : right. you have a bigger vocabulary, probably. so you – and, and you can make connections between the languages.  : it's hard, i don't know exactly  : no, i think, yeah no. not so much but then again, my thinking is not so much language oriented, right. my professional thinking is more thinking about/  : /the data and the math. and stuff  : yeah, it's agnostic to the underlying language.  : mhm. : mhm.  : well i mean i think yeah you're always trying to push the boundaries of something right and so pushing the boundaries is inhibiting the boundary. you sort of inhibit the conventional way of thinking about it and trying to see if there is a different way of approaching the problem.  : mhm.  : i mean i think i'm agreeable in general with sort of people. -laughs- but in terms of the way that they think about things, i'm disagreeable. i'm highly critical of the way that people approach problems and so i think that's part of the motivation to find different ways of approaching the problem. that's just, there is certain ways that people do things that kind of bothers you or just you find unsatisfactory.  : well i think a large part of what's missing is sort of motivated by redoing the same things that you understand over and over again and just collecting more of the same type of information which doesn't really push things forward very much, right? so, it's really about trying to do something that's different and collecting a different type of information that can then, or looking at things in a different way that can really push our understanding further. so that's a big problem in biology where we can - you know, the world is so complex, you can keep doing the same thing over and over again for fifty years and just sort of collecting sort of, you know, variations on and, and that doesn't necessarily, you know, bring the big innovations and steps forwards.   : in the community?  : within my own work? : i think you know i think like anyone else, my work has evolved over the years from tackling different questions and thinking about things in different ways i think the more - the latest paradigm shift, if you call it that, is, is sort of the frustration of a computation biologist as you always analyze data and gets some insights. but um... but it's hard to measure the value of these insights, right. and so, where i think the paradigm shift has occurred in the past few years is maybe what we should - our insights should be more measurable in terms of their value. how much do, this gets back to sort of creating more predictive models of, of the system rather than just descriptive models of the system. : and so i think that's an area that's challenging, right? because it's - there is a lot of, in my field, there is a lot of sort of description of what's going on. which then kind of, because you have so much data, then it can kind of sometimes lead you unsatisfied cause it's not sufficient to describe. you know you really want to predict. : i mean i think in its ability to predict the outcome of future experiments, right, that's sort of the goal, right. in the sense you can you have a lot of data you can say well this data is showing this and this, but it's very qualitative, right. where if i take this data and say well this predicts the following will happen, then to me that's, that's just much better, qualitatively better, because then you're really creating more of a testable model, testable hypothesis. and that has more intrinsic value i think.    : no, no that's great, that too, but in a predictive framework, right. i think that's - that can be challenging in lots of area of science where things can be more descriptive and it's hard to do more predictive things, right? but, so a predictive model will actually not just predict the outcome based on the data, but will actually do it in a way that's motivated by an understanding of the system and not just through, you know, sort of black box type explanations and things.  : no.  : uh huh : right.  : mhm.  : right.  : yeah so i mean i think science is always constrained by our ability to measure things. so whatever our current technology is for measuring things is the constraint and as we innovate and create new ways to measure things, then that creates sort of big shifts in scientific community. it creates new fields or it creates entirely new disciplines. so yeah, i think that sort of... i don't know if that was the question. -laughs- : i think we touched on a lot of aspects. -laughs- i don't know what we haven't touched on.  : well i mean/ : well i don't know that it's unique, but i, i think it, it you know there's the element underlying all of this is what this drive to simplify and understand and this connection to sort of is connected to our inherent sense of what's beautiful, right? what's, what's worth pursuing. what has value. and so that you know... is somehow interconnected right, our concept of beauty, elegance, simplicity and why it's worth pursuing otherwise it's just we're doing it because it can be done. but it has a value, right, that we associate some value with it. it has, you know, it has quality. so that's harder to sort of describe, but that i think is the underlying driver of all of this.  : -laughs-   : right. : (uh huh)  : mhm, and he did his studies how long ago? : okay, yeah.  : sure sure sure, sure  : ...that's hard because, um, at the moment i'm pretty baffled about what represents you know accomplishment. um, just taking on a pure, um, level of my own satisfaction i guess. um, probably um –laughs- things that i've never published and have just, um, spent my whole life thinking about. um, i think about all sorts of stuff that's not really you know my job to think about and especially during graduate school for example and you know i had a lot of time and, uh, my mindset just kind of you know probably diverged more and more from - from most of my cohort through thinking about a bunch of things and some of those things, um, became part of my work, but generally speaking in terms of publishing, what i found was you know sort of the things that were the most normal not you know kind of divergent, or the things that you know, you can work on that in the usual publishing kind of way. so, um..., for example, uh, you know when i was in graduate school, i thought a lot about sort of ideas of "knowledge viruses" and so on, which i guess you know is pretty much parallel to what people now refer to as memes. : well, / : um no  : um, but i was thinking of it more in kind of the genetic sense / : / of something that has an independent - natural selection basically  : but, um, so that kind of work has, has, has—in my current work has been developed quite a bit into these ideas of um disinformation. and basically different kinds of information metrics for prediction power versus latent prediction power versus disinformation. i just gave some talks about this at a conference so - um but that's unpublished. so i guess that that kind of line of long-term thinking to me has been more satisfying and more difficult because it's kind of like again and again and again, you know you find that it's not quite right and you're looking for real data and you have to rethink and so on... so it's kind of that iterative rethink, rethink, rethink. i like that.   : yeah, it's never done. you're never done and i guess sort of that it's fundamental. that it’s really kind of out of the zone where you feel confused basically. it's kind of what i said before. you know, science -  being confusing specifically - but i have a high tolerance, or even attraction towards you know being in that state where i feel like i don't know what i'm talking about  : most people i find really want to avoid that kind of. a little bit of it they can handle, but usually they move off move off towards their zone right/ : /and i'm divergent that way that i kinda put myself in, uh, an area where i know i don't know what i'm talking about and i'm confused and so on and i try to work through it. : yeah. um..., well..., i think early on in my scientific career i got some kind of direct rewards for just going off and kind of not being the way i was - everyone was kind of going through the sequence. so, i started working in a lab, actually at [university 1: where the participant worked in a lab] before my freshman year, and i just worked—research, research, research you know the whole time i was in college. so i had um i think i had like five papers and you know when i graduated. um, i think the first paper i had is probably the most cited paper i've ever had, 'cause it was a method, um, and then the next paper was like a cell paper. um, and basically, um, one of the things they do nicely there is they had a tutorial system. and so you meet with just a scientist you know, as a tutor, um, and the tutor that i had, this guy [name 1: the participant’s former tutor], he's a kind of crazy cell biologist who would kind of come in and just show us pictures of whatever he felt like that day. he would just show up with funny pictures. and so anyway, at that point i'd already been working in labs for several years and you know doing research sort of the way you're supposed to. and, uh, although again probably at a much higher level of independence than is the norm, but basically one day lambo showed up with these pictures of endoplasmic reticulum through fluorescence microscopy and looking at it i noticed like one funny little geometric feature of it and just proposed on the spot a mechanism of how the whole thing would get built would be reflected by that geometric structure. and so [name 1], being [name 1], he got like hyperexcited and the net result was i got drawn into that summer proving it experimentally and, uh, got a bunch of papers out of that and just a lot of feeling of reward out of it. so, basically it felt validating that you just kind of go off and make up stuff that's one way of saying it, but that, um, actually has value. i don't know  : i mean, did better for me than you know sort of following the formula  : so yeah, right, right, it turned out to be right—we were able to show it in action through more fluorescence microscopy. : well, um, i guess my feeling is that, um, you still have to fit in –laughs- to your, your, your cohort and that going—it's easy to go too far so that you no longer fit your cohort. put it that way. so, um, post-docs and graduate students and so on provide this good moderator because you know they have to live in the world of everybody else and um by you know working with them you kind of are forced to fit in better and that's a - that's a positive thing, um, for finding—making your peace with the rest of the world. um so i'm not sure if i answered your question. : well, let me put it this way. my sense is that um science, like any other activity, is a social activity. you know, we like to think of ourselves as being completely empirical and objective, um, but that in some ways it's first and foremost a social movement. it's about who can kind of recruit followers and sort of an idea that, um, kind of lets lots of people at a certain point where they're ready for it, you know advance their interests. so, um, i think that, um, the parts of all this that, in my experience, work best for me are when, um, there's a very functional result that we care about. it's just you know a real world, empirical result um as opposed to, um, you know sort of the social group, um, kind of forming just a theory that says you know "well this is our theory, and so you know we want to listen to each other elaborate versions of our theory." so, you know, for example, when i was in graduate school, um, i started doing a kind of biophysical modeling of protein structure that was a bit different from most people in the field were doing at that time, and at first it was a positive you know and you should publish a bunch of papers. and then as it went on, it was making more of a sense of kind of headbutting, you know "this is the way we do it, and you aren't doing it the way we do it" and so on, and the solution in that case was for a number of years, actually, was to start a company –laughs- and just make software tools for people in pharmaceutical companies and biotech who were trying to solve their problems you know on real, real proteins. and the question "can you do something useful for them?" um, at least for a few years was actually, um, looking back, um, kind of the right way to make some progress and have some impact while waiting for the rest of the field basically to come around and say "oh yes well actually this is useful, and we all want to do it too." um, so, i'd had that experience a few times that if you know if you can sort of escape off to a purely empirical customer basically, who you know they haven't bought into a theoretical framework and all they care about is their results.  : for a while, yeah. i mean i think the scientific community has its own mechanisms for getting their revenge. sometimes it can be kind of a painful for a while.  : um, are we talking again in the lines of, uh, the sort of social aspect or are we talking / : /about an actual real problem that - : okay, well, so i guess what i would say - i mean i don't think i really fit with what at least you described, um, in terms of the certain people that you're looking for. i don't view my career as very successful  : um. i've been blocked again and again by the kinds of things that i was just describing and, um, i've been continually impressed by just how crucial it is to fit in to what the other people in your field are currently doing. and um often times experienced this sort of you know 5 year lag phase where, you know 5 years after i've gotten fed up with trying to convince people of something and then everybody's doing it. um, so, um, i would say the single biggest problem that i've had has been that, um, what this has tended to produce especially because, um, you know, i have students and i really can't put them through those kinds of difficulties. it's not fair. right? so, basically, i've—i mean you could say it's a mistake, but i've switched fields basically because you know this particular area seemed blocked, i can't ask students to work on it anymore because it's just not fair to them, um, having those kinds of barriers to their work. so, um, you know, at some level, um, i still feel like i'm really, um, sorting out you know how–i guess one way of saying this—is how you find the small number of people at any given time who, um, can really make use of and are, are ready to use something that you've got as like a result that kind of the problem of nucleation and growth of a little community. um, i feel like i've been very not good at that. um, you know, and then just the general pattern in my experience is that informal channels of communication—like conferences or workshops or just, you know, any kind of one-on-one interaction is like very, very effective compared with the formal channels, like sending paper off to a journal, that sort of thing where it gets stuck on all sorts of—basically trivial issues, about—you know basically journals don't really put much of an effort into finding how to connect, how do you even figure out who, so i guess one way one saying is, you just ask somebody to make predictions about the interest or impact of something that's not in their actual area of work, and it's basically predicting how other people are going to be able to use or respond to that. we are not very good at that is what i'm saying.  : yeah, yeah : yeah, sure. um, so, um, so... so, i think i mean i look at some other people that i see doing a really great job at moving around those barriers, i know a mathematician who is incredibly, um, successful at, um, drawing together kind of a community of people around him partly because he just really puts himself out there in writing up all sorts of useful stuff that's not, you know deliberately not really even his research, he blogs a lot for example about a lot of um topics you know where his on the one hand you know he knows a lot of things really well so he can bring his expertise to you know some other topic and kind of see some of the connections in there that aren't quite the way from the original researchers presented it. and so he just draws a lot of people out of the woodwork you know and just get attracted to his, um, his blog and those that end up turning into actual connections in his work. and i've, i've really, i think i've restricted myself very much to kind of the official channels of the thing. if you can't publish in a journal then oh, basically can't do anything with it, you know, so, um, i feel like i have a lot to learn basically from looking at this friend of mine and seeing how he does it, but-  : well, um, that's hard because i don't actually feel like i have really got it right in any sense yet. um, so, um, i believe that basically, um, you have to really be able to sort of on a very short time scale like, you know, every day basically each day, um, have both an empirical test of your ideas like you can actually do something, either computationally or experimentally which sort of gives you a direct feedback whether you know what you're doing is useful or not. and then secondly, um, have a way of doing the same thing through other people and ideally like on a very short time scale like every day. and you know what i found more lately is that um, at least cut - slicing and dicing the granularity of that feedback loop to smaller and smaller and smaller pieces / : /basically seems to be the direction which works as opposed to it doesn't work. like if you send somebody a manuscript based on, you know, you met them at a conference and then send them a paper, the chances that you're going to get any response at all, because you know everybody is too busy. once they get back to their office and they've got 600 emails, or something like that, like do they really have time to go through a manuscript of equations and so on / : um, whereas if i basically make like a few slides if you will, it's more like a talk that sort of tries to capture the same ideas. so, um, basically just having this rapid cycle where you're always plugged into, you know, a few people and a few tests, just have that all the time and uh, follow wherever it leads you. : i guess what i'm saying is that, you know, sometimes i get students who seem to have the same kind of inclination as i do that they're like looking for more basic questions to ask as opposed to looking for you know a little niche that's one of you know 20 boxes in our existing field. um, basically i worry because i myself you know have experienced the difficulty of putting yourself in that place. so, um, having this very immediate kind of constant feedback telling you whether you can have a big problem or you can basically, one crucial way of saying it is" what's good enough?" what we need is to be good enough in the sense of good enough defined as able to keep doing what i'm doing. right, there's nothing actually stopping me, um, so depending on what you're doing there's a specific list of things that you have to have, right, in order to be able to keep doing it. you may need a certain amount of money, certain amount of sort of official validation of your results, um, a certain number of people that you're able to work with. and so crystal clarity about what is that good enough, right, then that equals freedom. do you see what i'm saying?  : if you know what that is, then you're able to have a signal that's constantly telling you how to get there, and then you can basically live at that good enough, then you have freedom to choose what you can do. otherwise, you don't and you really have to look at what other people are doing and say "okay well these are things that people will buy so, you know, make 5 of those." : right so the situation that i've been in is that, um, it's kind of schizophrenic in the sense that the actual work is very validated. you know, and i've just had experience after experience again and again where you're getting results that are just way too good to be true, i mean even they are what you hoped you would get, but then you have to worry about, okay, how are we going to you know be able to get this out there in a form that other people will be able to - i mean typically the problem i have is where basically, um, we're always combining a method from this area with a question from that area and your reviewers, there's always at least one piece of the paper is just outside of their knowledge and so that makes things difficult. so, um, i'm not sure if i'm answering your question. : right, right, right : well, for me, i think the core is that i really enjoy just learning and, uh, going back to this business about being confused, i think i have a high tolerance for the sense that there's something productive in going through being confused in order to get to learning something. : and um i've been through that cycle you know so many times and hadn't really the positive reward that it becomes a habit, it becomes part of your daily sustainable cycle. : well um, so one thing really comes to mind. um... so, um, you know what i said at the beginning about you know the, the, the group socialization where you become socialized to the norms of your group, and around that kind of teenage period. um so there are a couple things that for me i think set me off on a bit of an individual track. i mean one very simply is that um, you know i think due to my upbringing and just like moving from school to school and you know growing up partly on the west coast and then going off to [city 1: a place the participant has stayed at], um, you know, i'm half chinese, so there weren't very many asians around and the other kids were like "oh he's this alien, let's go alienate him." uhh, so, basically you get taught, you can't just trust what other people think and say, um you're on your own and there's some disadvantages to that but it's just reality, you can't just trust what other people think to be you know the true description of the way the world is or the way the world should be. um, and then more positive versions of that, um, when i was 15 basically my dad went on sabbatical and we lived a bunch of different places, we were basically wandering around for like a year in [country 1: where the participant has temporarily stayed] and [country 2: where the participant has temporarily stayed] and [country 3: where the participant has temporarily stayed], and at that period you're really hungry for, you know, connection, peer group, connections with people sort of at your age so if you're wandering with your parents you're highly motivated to just like randomly start talking with people. and so um i developed a lot of, um, uh, you know you have to go through the, working up your courage basically to go talk to random people um, in another language, usually of the opposite sex. um, and uh then also you know, finding that okay that works and from all sorts of new things in your life, you know that way, um so on the one hand not having a connection to groups but having a connection to individuals, and sort of you know taking the risks involved in that. and then when i came back to the u.s., um, through one of these psat type uh you know, the exams they used to do i don't know if they still do it/ : /so i was basically invited to one of these summer programs where you go off for the summer. and i had an interesting experience where basically - small group dynamics right, small 20 kids or something like that, and you sort of have intense social interactions in that kind of an environment. um, i found that basically you know typically in situations like that again where you're kind of a loner with the outlier it's a confusing stressful sort of experience. basically, i could ask myself at any time, well why did i just do that? and there was basically like this second voice who would always tell me the answer-it's like an oracle. so, what i basically shifted into this, this kind of pattern i guess you'd say, you know, kind of a combination of observer and relying on being able to ask any question about what my motivations were or why i did things or what just happened and so on, and always get an answer that i could sort of test and find "yeah well that's pretty much what it was." um, so, um... you know and i'm not sure whether everybody has that or not, um this sense that "ask any question you want and you'll get an answer" um, but basically that you know in proceeding down the line into confusion in research, that again you can kind of have a certain level of trust you know about putting yourself in those situations because, you can in the same sort of way you know, kind of ask an oracle, and to a certain extent you know, coming up with a way, an empirical way like an experimental way of answering your questions-kind of like that. : so you know i guess another version of that is that, um, like i mentioned i started a company coming out of graduate school at stanford- everybody starts companies coming out of stanford, so this was a bio-informatics software company at a period where bio-informatics didn't quite exist yet. and um it was me and um my ph.d. advisor, [name 2: the participant’s phd advisor], and we both are people who write a lot of code i mean and write a lot of software so it was sort of this funny situation where you're both like a principal, you have to go out and do all the fundraising for any kind of deal making thing you have to be the person there, but also the person who is doing all the work / : / like lifting all the, all the heavy lifting, writing all the code, so, you get into these situations where it's like "okay we have this release date - product release, it's on this day, it's two weeks away and we have you know 150 bugs that have to be fixed in these two weeks," it was so and so many bugs per day. this was in the days of you know c, so you're working with data structures that are highly corruptible and is not going to do- so basically dynamic memory in those kind of languages you know you make one tiny little mistake here and like a million instructions later something goes kaboom. and if something makes it go kaboom you're like well what made it go kaboom, something way back there. and so i would get into this same kind of oracular structure where it's like okay, you know, we got 30 things we have to fix this afternoon and the classic sort of situation was these things could like 2 weeks to figure out one of them  : i mean because they're just mind blowing like something just goes wrong down here and you have no idea. so, what i would find again and again and again is um first of all there's a dynamic that we refer to as a squeeze play where you get some kind of signal that is a proxy for the actual thing that goes kaboom, and now that metric, the proxy metric basically it's a binary squeeze, right it's just like looking something up in a phonebook you look in the middle between this point and that point, its fine here its bad here what about right in the middle. oh okay, it's bad there too, so now it's between you know here and here and like basically you know in log time you can just get it. and the other thing is that sometimes you see that signal a couple times in like the last two minutes and you just immediately guess "oh it's this funny thing!" you know and basically this moving up and down the scales of you know completely abstracted fundamental down to tiny, tiny detail. your ability to move up and down that stack separates out basically the people who, um, you know could like fix one bug per two weeks versus the people who have to fix 30 you know every afternoon or something. but you know, we made our schedules i mean i was always able to crush all the things that everybody said i couldn't possibly do. um, so, um just you know that dynamic, i mean i like that dynamic of basically being um in the very empirical problem and you have to use all of your tricks basically to -. and the other thing is like every 5 minutes you find out oh you were wrong because the thing about this is like you know if you solve another one every 15 minutes, it's like a whole life time experience compressed in that because you go from complete bafflement to like absolutely specific hypothesis and test and if you can run that dynamic fast, it’s like, it's like... it's incredible education basically, in intuition, because you start to "oh i was working on this, i was ignoring that i had this little inkling thought but i ignored it but okay that's what it was" and i should have known because - i mean i should have known like 15 minutes ago rather than doing like you know 10 more levels of squeeze i should have just got it but i missed it. i still got it you know 10 minutes later or whatever but - : uh, actually, uh, art. yeah, he's a photographer, this was at [university 2: where the participant’s father stayed] which at that time the art department was umpretty much, um, artists rather than art historians. um, so, a lot of sculptors and painters and photographer. um, i definitely feel that from both my mom and my dad, um, you know i think of them both as just having this ability to you know cut through all sorts of stuff to what was really the core dynamic and sort of this ability to talk very broadly across a whole set of problems. um, it was, i had a fun upbringing, um -  : she has done a bunch of things but i guess her last piece of her career is what we would call photographic conservation, basically the science of, um, museum, i don't want to say archival but photographic - i mean photographs are an interesting conservation problem because they're both paper and photographic chemistry and i guess going back to other things [inaudible] it's metal- it’s a metal plate rather than paper. but, so, there's a whole bunch of problems that are paper conservation and also funny photographic chemistry and stuff, so she did a lot of work in that which was basically research in addition to the sort of practical career of - yeah. : yeah, yeah, but they're both really, i rank them very high you know in terms of all the people i've ever met in how they can think things through and how they can see into things. i mean like my mom lately she was diagnosed as having a blood glucose level that was like getting into the pre-diabetic range so she just went off and got those little kits for - and she started doing basically scientific experiments and she's figured out some pretty neat things. like she can make her blood glucose peak after eating, the peak will be dramatically lower if she does a specific kind of exercise regimen like right after eating, so she figured out all this stuff that sort of goes beyond what is in the literature, just by basically doing experiments herself. so, both of them i would say are very independent thinkers, they think for themselves, and i think i grew up in that and sort of inherited that. : no, only child. : and the other thing i guess that's worth mentioning is that so, when i say my father, i'm actually referring to my stepfather. my mother and my biological father got divorced when i was uh 3 and so first of all, i was with my mom a fair amount during several periods. one period basically when she wanted to start this career in photographic conservation, she ended up getting a job, it was supposed to be initially an internship but basically she turned it into - she was supposed to be interning with the main conservator at the so called [institution 1] which is in [city 1]. anyways so we were off on our own, turned into 3 years, it was supposed to initially be only 1 year. and then my parents coming back together again it was rough because they had been apart for so long and very much with my mom i basically was sort of like the best friend that she would talk out all her, her troubles with and i've seen my parents you know arguing and getting into all sorts of trouble dynamics and i think that actually is probably the really core training of this certain oracular voice in the sense that the only way you can learn lots of things is either you make the mistake yourself or you see someone else make it. alright and so i had this sort of very in depth training in like all of the mistakes you could make by watching other people make them, and of course you know it's not your own mistakes as much it is your right to be objective about it or see where you know the thing went wrong. but also sort of being treated as an equal or a person you go to for advice you have to like / : well mainly this was like 12 or/ : well from like 10 up through thereafter basically. um it really, it was someone else asking you the question and now you have to give the oracle's answer, if you see what i'm saying. so that was kind of the dynamic that my mom and i had. my mom talks about talks about wondering what she should do or what does this all mean  : um, i don't know. both my mom and i were and remain very, very close so um... it was natural just for us to just talk everything through, but i think that my big role in what we were just talking about- i was getting into the habit of being that sort of voice basically that chimes in when you need it to.  : right squeezing things : right, exactly, so so my aim in that work was always to use both to the maximum extent and to sort of play them up against each other. so the squeeze play would often show me that i actually had known the answer a long time back but had not paid sufficient attention or something like that. so that kind of helps train your intuition, and the thing i loved about that whole dynamic was that, you know it just gives this very rapid cycling of test - training of tests on you know intuition tests basically. um so um, i very much value and try to practice intuition, and experiences like that very much show you that it's there and it can do the magic basically that you need and to a certain extent there's no other way to do the magic. i mean you have to have things that just come from no where because otherwise where do you get those right. : so well when you challenge it, you ask it questions and you know hope that there will be an answer um and the other that you try to be sensitive, i mean going back to this whole flow business, i do very much find that phenomenon to be real for me, um, that the you know, i can go into flow states particularly visual flow states where you know you're sort of your immersion in everything that's going on is up a level from what it usually is. um, uhh... in terms of real work, umm you know i try to balance out you know working with that online, you know so that it's giving me material but, but put into a process that ideally will, will check it as quickly as possible. so on the one hand to give it space and on the other hand to, i mean i guess one way of saying it is that to me what really motivates me is that i wake up in the morning and that i realize "huhh this idea, i can test that today" so if i have an idea and then i see a way of actually putting it to the test, really motivating and i will get it done in the next two hours. so that's basically where i like to be. and um the flip side of that though is if you get results now you've got to communicate that to the person, to other people and try and get them interested in it, which i'm not so good at but you know. : yeah i mean for me, definitely there's two parallel processes going on and uh one that's definitely coming from a career viewpoint is kind of the building bridges to collaborators and audiences if you will. that part i don't think i'm very good at and to a certain extent it's sort of the, the - just the other side of my coin in other words if i'm divergent than other people then okay. in some ways that’s a good thing and in other ways that’s a difficult place to be. um, but you know - : yeah, yeah i think one of the things that i'm gradually learning how to do now is create frameworks where i'm really working with other people in a very fine grained basically everyday kind of way and that we're both bringing to that - i mean one way of saying it is, i like to make aphorisms so my aphorism for this is "a good partner is someone who is good at their part" so i try - what i'm finding now is there's very specific ways that i can um, be able to really out of the whole world of people and skill sets out there be able to find a very specific skill set and i'm doing this through these online contractor bidding sites. so this now is in the context of building software systems for particular kinds of ideas about how people learn so we're building, this has been based on work i've done in my teaching but it's very specific kinds of active learning methods. so that's just an example but the point is that um, i feel like now that i had to go through this struggle of figuring out "okay how do i put myself into a genuinely functional relationship with other people." what are actually fine grained really useful immediate ways of doing that and i feel like i'm getting there. where the feedback is okay, now everyday i'm basically working with a bunch of different people and it's really going great and there' s all sorts of the products coming out of that other people can basically validate and it's not me saying whether it's any good or not but other people say "okay this looks like the right direction." but, it's just been sort of an exploratory process to try and figure out what works versus what doesn't. as i say- for me the official channels, i guess one way of saying it is it’s a lagging indicator, in other words you have to solve the problem already with some other method and then you know several years later the other indicator will say "oh yeah actually that's good" but if you try to rush it it'll just kind of choke on it basically. gag.  : well, i guess what i would say is that what i teach in my intro bioinformatics theory course i teach the students, you know there's like three you know super powers that people have in like pictures, language, and in our case i throw in equations as - and that um they kind of carry the weight you know of this burden of keeping the balls in the air, so either its grammar keeping the seven things up in the air so that you can actually hold the thought in your mind, or it's a picture you're just seeing in front of you, you draw it out on a napkin right, and um so um... i'm a big believer in using representation you know as the... power tool that carries the weight while you're trying to struggle through your confusions. the confusion made specific is a representation, so i mean this business of using graph models of various kinds of problems is really, really helpful for me in bioinformatics, um and it's funny how that works i mean, you know i was doing that back in the time of this company and um sort of draw for example like alignments sort of like graph structures and then um one of the first things i did when i came to [university 3: where the participant works] was basically you know the company was being sold and i was just shifting out of - -end of recording 1/ start of recording 2-: - umm so but on the other hand it completely changes how you think about the problem and it opens out really another whole set of ideas so i'm a big believer in this idea that like very very basic ideas of representation actually translate to deep ideas that you'll end up spending the next 5 years or something trying to understand and trying to use and getting a lot, layer after layer out of so and also being validated by other people that, the field went on for whatever 20 years in this sort of strange way but for whatever reason none of us thought about it in terms of the graph structure and as soon as you do okay there's all these things now that you want to do. so um so, again i'm not really sure i answered your question. : yeah so what i tell the students is "okay getting stuck in one let's just jump to one of the other superpowers" and you know each person has a different mix of which superpower is kind of their home base or the strongest skillset but that kind of consciously exercising them and deliberately saying okay we are going to look at it from all three points of view and seeing how does one inform the other and how do we play them off against each other. i guess one way of saying it is that for me, more important than the skills are the meta skills, the conscious thought about "what is it that i'm actually doing here?" because that's what i'm really going to take forward to other things. so thinking about that.  : well um, so um, i have thought about these things a lot, so very concretely to me creativity is simply asking a more fundamental question. in other words i think of there being this tree structure with a root where there's zero assumptions and then there are these branches where you assume this or you assume that and we pile up you know assumption, assumption, assumption, after a particular place - at a leaf on this tree structure, and sometimes that's the right place to be and other times it turns out that the um place where you went wrong was five steps further back up your stack of assumptions. and so the ability to see your own assumptions becomes the skill in a sense because sort of by definition assumptions are what you don't see, the things you just assume them, they're not part of your conscious formulation of a new problem and so you could just be completely be in your head against the wall wasting time because you know you're operating under an assumption that is just wrong. but being able to make that, what's the actual process for making that become conscious. um, so um, i actually work on that in a statistical framework, this idea of empirical information metrics where there's basically a metric for prediction power, there' s a metric for latent prediction power which basically can tell you even if you don't know what your assumptions are, can basically tell you that your current model is failing to capture real aspects of the data, it's an empirical measure of that divergence and basically to then deliberately use that in sort of a multi level model with the best possible outcome is that you do the necessary test, where basically you say okay i'm getting potential information under my model so now i'm going to go to the fully general version of my model and test that and if i get really lucky what i'm going to find is that the potential information that i'm getting at this level is going to push all the way up to the next level and basically what it's going to be saying is this entire model framework is broken and then typically what that gives is sort of localizable potential information- in other words like out of all the observations some of them are pretty much fitting and some are not, and so it's basically like pointing there "you've got to go this way"/ (siren sounds in background). : /so basically, one is just making the signal explicit so that it's not the question of good enough has an actual answer. it's not just like "well we are having our trouble but this is just another day in the life of the way things are" but actually "this is not good enough!" and it has to go up to this next level and then choose the gradient to basically say well how far do we have to go and how do we incorporate this so, um... stuff like debugging is a fast cycle training on that kind of thing. um, uh... in terms of inhibition versus disinhibition, one thing i will definitely say is that in my experience it's really important to go away and come back. so if you work hard on something and you think you understand it or if you think you don't understand it but you've got this particular version of it and then you go away and you have to do something else just completely different because there's a deadline or a conference you have to go to, and then you come back generally what i find is i just can't remember what i thought or what i was doing and i look at it again and say "oh this is obviously it" or "oh it should be this way" but just a bunch of things will just let go and immediately move because basically i can't even remember my own assumptions, and um so a bunch of things just become obvious where before i was stuck because i was harboring within that set of assumptions. and you can't really escape that, i mean to work you've got to make some assumptions and depending upon what you're actually doing at that moment you know it's hard to have an empirical signal that tests every aspect of what you're assuming, so often times just getting away and forgetting your own assumptions, you come back and you just start seeing things that you weren't seeing before, typically really fast, because you come back and within five minutes its like "oh, okay, yeah that makes a lot more sense." : we when i think about it, it's definitely in terms of this idea of um independent draws from some - some sampling process, right. and information to a large extent is just this ability to test an idea independently right or in other words to actually get independence, the problem that we have is that we don't get independence because you're on a fixed line and we've got to keep doing the same thing over and over again so you're not really getting an independent piece of information. so to a certain extent this kind of "forget, come back" you can also use other people that way. i mean often times when you have to present your ideas to somebody else then it's these pieces where you kind of you know it, but then you try to explain it to someone else you start to realize where you're stuck, "this part here is really, this is messed up, this is no good."/ : /and so i was talking with a friend of mine's mathematician and he was talking about this case where he and collaborator worked for a long, long time on this problem and later on a paper came out they realized they missed one basic thing and you know if they had ever asked themselves... is it this thing they would have realized, i mean in some kind of very basic way, there was a number is one way of saying it, there was a number for a ratio and they were assuming a ratio of 1 but if they had ever asked well what "do we know anything about this ratio" they would have realized that you can't just assume it's 1, what could it be, and they would've quickly gotten it basically, so the whole ball game basically went off of not asking questions and usually i think the value of having both of them working together is each person will sort of puncture the other person's balloon and ask that question "well why do you assume it's 1?" but in this case i guess they go too much into a mind meld and they were both thinking the same thing, so if they had just talked to somebody else and just tried to explain "okay this is how we are setting it up and we are assuming 1" " well why are you assuming 1..." / : / "hmm maybe we shouldn’t assume 1" they would've gotten / : okay, okay.  : sounds russian (laughter) : eah his name sounds slavic i should say.  : no, because romanian is not the slavic language. (laughter)  : yeah it's surrounded by all the slavic countries yeah.  : right.  : yes (laughter)  : even with a migraine.  : my latest project.  : usually it will be the latest project.  : because i feel like the latest project always goes further away from what i've learned.  : and in a sense it puts together more pieces.  : both. although ok. i don't know if this is the place to say it. i believe that ideas are always around. i just think it's a matter of how you get to them. and i think that's where, at least the way i see creativity, that's where i see myself being creative, basically being able to tackle a problem and just solve it further... go further with it then other people.  : yeah. : ok honestly i think it's... so for me, it's picking something slightly out of my comfort zone, but knowing that i can come at it from a different angle then other people had.  : because i need to be entertained, and then i like... i mean i like the feeling of knowing a field really well. but at some point, once i see the limitations, i would rather go into something that's slightly unknown for me.  : but i know that i can make a contribution because i come at the problem from a different angle. so, i don't necessarily... i agree with einstein. i don't necessarily think someone has to be smarter to come up with an idea, i think it's just a matter of inquisitiveness and wanting to be excited about something.  : i don't know, but i don't mind failure.  : actually this is something that i noticed personally with people that i've met over the time that i have been in schools and you know had students, that there is something at some point in our lives, builds competence and for me competence equals how much failure you can get until you start succeeding. and honestly sometimes i become very philosophical about it. : you know if i basically don't make any major... you know super major break-throughs, that's fine because i can still do very fundamental. i can still help by doing very fundamental work and lay the foundation for someone else to do... to take it further.  : so as long as i enjoy working the problem... : to me that's what i am supposed to do. that's my job. and i'm fine if i don't hit on a super major success.  : honestly coming to the united states was the hardest thing i have ever done. (laughter) that's that. : because i mean, i like unusual situations, but there were too many things basically hitting me at the same time. and the worse was actually the language.  : so the ability or the inability to communicate properly. yeah. where coming from the environment where i grew up i was like a person who always mastered the language, always was witty. it took me a long time to become witty again. (laughter) : so and then not having, i never realized you know when i was in college i was still away, i moved away from home but i didn't realize i still was counting on a supportive family and friends where as i came here, i literally didn't know anybody.  : so no family, no friends. took about two months to get out of the anxiety basically. so it was the most... i don't know, depressing part of my life in a sense.  : 22. : i came right after college. wow. that's something yeah. and where did you go, [college 1] , [college 2]? : [college 1] first, [college 1] for phd and [college 2] for post doc.  : i think if it were the other way, it might have been a little bit easier. [college 1] is really harsh on.  : it's a very harsh environment in general. i think. : yeah. : i don't know about [college 3] but maybe yeah.  : i was just trying really hard. i would, i think i was telling one of my intern students who's coming from france i told her i would... mondays were the worst for me when people would talk about their weekend. (laughter) because you know i would have to go from yes no to so i would always make it a goal for myself you know every week to try to make some progress. i started... i was fixated on those goals. so kind of small goals.  : and was happy when i could achieve them and do more and i knew... i mean i knew it was going to be hard in a sense there was going to be difficult... even with the language, even though i knew quite a bit of english, but i knew i wasn't conversational enough. so i figure well it must be like anything else you just practice and at some point it just clicks and that's kind of how i felt.   : maybe. so my phd was on iridium chemistry of all things. uranium gamma chemistry. so it's basically it's a niche of even inorganic chemistry. a small one of that. and i think... i would have probably stayed very main stream if it weren't for that and always like pick problems where most people work? but we were very successful. i say we because i always think that my mentor always helped like really fast with that project so the fact, seeing that you can accomplish so much in such a short amount of time basically in a pretty much unknown field made me think very differently about how i want to do science. so basically, instead of tackle what everybody thinks are the big problems, pick at you know, smaller fields and things that people don't go after them because they're hard and they don't have a clue how to go about it directly. so in a sense yeah, i guess that was very influential.  : ok. : no actually, no.  : and why is that?  : right. : right. yeah, i agree with that.  : well part of it... so when you start in a niche field, i guess it's hard to go main stream in a sense because the set of skills. so the way i see it is, i didn't necessarily seek out this project. but then my training became relatively specific, so i made a decision to go as far as i could for my post doc from that field because i knew it's not good for me. and then, so i went to a very main stream group. like huge group, eventually the guy got a nobel prize, and that taught me a lot of things. i feel like my first two or three years i was, in a sense, struggling how to kind of get the two together. so eventually, in the beginning i fell back on what i knew, which was my phd. part of it, i think, is the tenure system is so annoying in a sense that basically you have to be successful. pretty much doesn't matter what your successful. but then, once tenure wasn't an issue or like i didn't feel was an issue... about year four of my career i had a student who started, i became a lot more risky. so like we started very risky project and eventually we started building on that.  : and at the same time you know we had another project developing, so i guess the reason why... i mean a lot of people are distracted by the main stream science because it pays well (laughter). there is a lot of recognition and if you happen to be one of the early people who goes in it, i think you're the it person of the moment. but and you know i think that's definitely enough for a life-long career. i think if you make it, but at some point you know i think i got into this for a few reasons and i realize there are certain compromises that i just don't want to make. and maybe it's my inability to change at some point you know. i... at this point i am happier doing what i do maybe with less money and less recognition and then you know trying to basically build on some scraps that other people so if i don't think basically as much as i don't mind failure if i don't think, if i can't project even five years ahead you know that i can bring something so basically i look at what's out there and either i don't understand it well enough or i, it doesn't speak to me in a sense where oh i can see a problem here, and i can fix it in this way. then to me it's not worth it for me to get into it. that's kind of how i think.  : right. : not the way i see it, because i feel like if i work on a new field really, then pretty much everything you do is laying down a foundation.  : so, even if it's not solvable - if i don't see it being solvable - it's still... so i feel like even if i'm not smart enough to or creative enough to get to an application of the field i want to work in or i want to tackle if i can get the groundwork that somebody maybe 50 years down the road can find a major discovery, i think that's good enough.   : well pretty much all of my advisors have been very influential i mean starting even with my high school teacher chemistry teacher, seriously. so every i... in a sense i, every time when i worked with somebody, i ended up believing that you know they do there job properly and they're there to educate me and to support me to further my career. and i think they all did it to the best of their abilities and i guess it's, i don't know they... so basically i count four mentors that's not including my mom which was my earliest mentor i guess.  : well she, my mom was the person who really cared about me not, let's see how i put it best. let's put it this way, by the time i was in fifth grade, i was already bored with school (laughter). : and she basically find a way to challenge me and eventually tutored me but when i say tutored i mean really complimented a lot of the school studies such that and she was in a sense trying to be very drastic and not cuddly at all to show me that there is always more basically and there is no reason to be arrogant and i understand and i already know what's done in school and basically about high school then i started to look outside the classroom environment for challenges and then yeah the chemistry teacher she was, she didn't even put that much emphasis on teaching me chemistry because she figured i could do that on my own, which that in it's self i realized was very important. but she always pushed me to think outside of even the social constraints of the moment, which was very important because [country 1] was going through a lot of changes and a lot of people were unsure what they want to do. so she pushed me to be a pioneer and go away and explore other options and not basically try to deal with all those changes. and then my phd mentor really actually i owed him of building a very strong scientific foundation. and then my post doc mentor he really showed me how different the world can be from the point of view of not being just an academic basically. he was involved with multiple enterprises. yeah, so they all were very important. i picked something different from each one of them.  : and i guess important also because they were all very supportive.  : yeah i think that's important actually.  : i, well, i always tell myself i know how much i accomplish it that way, i tell myself i will definitely try to emulate everything that i thought was positive from all my mentors (laughter). yeah. and try to be objective about what was not positive and try not to do it. try not to repeat the mistakes of the scientific parents basically.   : yeah i don't know i mean i hope i have a basically a little bit, what would you call it bipolar relationship with students. they you know either click with me or they don’t.  : if they don't, then they leave.  : (laughter) yeah.  : overlap.  : that's good. orbital overlap.  : (laughter) i think the, the most important thing is their desire to do something. maybe i should say that differently... i like to see people that they're ambitious. and they don't just want to go through the system basically so and i try to dissuade them from actually even joining my lab. and sometimes it works, sometimes it doesn't. so some people have an amazing ability to kid themselves that they can adapt themselves to absolutely any situation. which it's not true and then that's one big clash.  : so people basically, i think some students maybe because they're too young, they don't understand when somebody tells them really you have to get that done. they actually, i think you know for them it's for them everything it's up in the air.  : so.  : that being said i think i am still more half more than 50% on the positive experience (laughter).  : and as i am getting older i am becoming more patient too which might have something to do with it.  : yeah.  : yes. i think so. it's based on the interactions afterwards.  : no. no. i know what you mean. i can tell in about half a year after i interact with them. it takes me about half a year after i interact with them.   : and tell kind of like where they will place.  : i can, i can't really tell based on basic applications.  : so now i'm actually a firm believer when people say they can tell something about a person just based on what they see on a cv or test scores or anything i don't agree, but i think three to six months of interacting like regular interactions eventually and so far those predictions have helped.  : intelligence is important, enthusiasm, work ethic, work ethic can be taught, yeah just three.  : that's what i look for.  : (laughter)  : yes. definitely. women are more shy and they don't speak up. they think they are less intelligent and i think they are less confident and this are like negative. however, they are always harder workers and try to compensate and i think it takes longer to build their confidence, but i think actually if women build their confidence they tend to kind of hold on to it a lot longer than guys. if that makes sense.   : i think in a sense maybe guys don't believe in their success as much. i mean, if they start less confident let's say. if they start confident then and they are slightly successful then that gets amplified a lot faster for guys then for girls. but i feel that with girls, or women, it takes a lot longer for them to believe that they are successful, but then if eventually they believe themselves then they can be unstoppable so. : that's fine. that's fine. (laughter) : the only advice i give them in terms of balance is i tell them that they should exercise regularly.  : that's pretty much it. i was never good at balancing but i know exercise, but i always tried to maintain some sort of exercise schedule. i notice actually for some reason - and this is something that i am not trained for - more students are having problems kind of problems - not mental problems - but anxiety issues and sometimes they tell me about it, sometimes they don’t.  so, while i actually i don't bite much into the whole like it has, everything has to be balanced i do think exercise is important. so in that respect, yeah i'm fine if they make sacrifices for that. because i know that improves their overall efficiency, happiness but no i'm not one to say that you should party at least certain percent of your time, you know.  : i walk, i hike, i try to stretch and do some sort of yoga.  : no.  : no. i actually i thought about that no i like to kind of enjoy the exercise.  : mhm.  : i don't know. i'm going to say something that i'm pretty sure you're looking for. it's a little bit harder for me to talk about. so when i was eight, my father died and i think that was influential in the sense that it suddenly put me from basically having a happy childhood into a state of almost in two years thinking of myself as a responsible adult. so in that respect... other than that, i mean i thought my mom and my brother, so my immediate family, were very supportive i don't think the extended family cared much about my success.  : or what i was trying to achieve. yeah. : yeah. yeah. yeah. yeah i think so.  : ok.  : ok.  : i'm sure you've had.   : right. yeah. i don't understand why it happens that way but apparently humans can help themselves to kick the weak when they perceive the other person to be weak so.  : yeah something like that.  : (laughter) : yeah (laughter) :  yes. yes and no.  : well, i mean the way i get ideas really is i'll list out myself, if i could actually make my job more about reading articles then you know being on committees (laughter), i think i would be a lot more creative and productive. but usually, i mean i enjoy you know learning about what other people do and if i actually can can have a sustained time where i read for a continuous period of time... : then eventually i start making connections between seemingly unrelated ideas or fields and i think that's where my ideas come from, honestly.  : it's hard to tell because they are so specific that i don't know and actually what i noticed is that ideas for me don't crystallize until so i get something that seems like an idea but i don't have the ability  to reason why you know i should go about it in a certain way... : until actually a little bit later. so, in the beginning it's mostly just seeing a connection where it looks like there is none. and then, and not even thinking why i see that connection.   : and then, while i stay with the idea and i think more about it then i think how to get to where i want to basically helps me understand why i even had the idea in the first place.  : if that makes sense. : right.  : yeah. : yeah. yeah. so yeah ok if we speak in those terms, yeah i mean part of me wants everything to be super rational and logical and basically have a predictive power from a logical process. but, but i am aware that, it doesn't always work like that. and yeah, i just basically trust my i guess training and knowledge to take me some place. and afterwards, i try to deconstruct it. yeah.  : no. : no i'll tell you. when i, when it's summer and fall, i don't have teaching responsibilities. : and there is less committee especially in the summer. summer is basically for me, i wind down after the academic year and then eventually i get rid of all the tasks that i'm behind. and then, i started having time and i started getting in the habit of reading and thinking more like actually science.  : and then, that has a peak usually end of summer maybe sometime in the fall, and then as the academic year starts, then people come at us with a vengeance and there is more and more i would call them not necessarily menial tasks but things that you can have a non-scientist do that you know i have to do. and then it gets worse and worse until june (laughter).   : no but yeah that's a good one.  : yeah. that's a good one. yeah.  : i know. : yeah well i mean we can (laughter) whine about the system yeah but. i think it's just things have progressed very differently than they were, they use to be.  : i guess a generation ago where a scientist was supposed to have time to think. these days, that's not factored in at all.  : that varies.  : cycles.... : well on the maximum time, it can be pretty high. i can do maybe like even thirty hours a week. and then on the other time it can go as low as to five. yeah yeah i think five, so maybe usually i would get a half day where i could get some work done in a week.  : maybe a little bit here or there. yup. : yes and no. i prefer to actually work in blocks of times. but never so, i rarely go into you know twenty hour flows.  : because, while i can be efficient like that, i notice that the payback is worse so then the unproductivity that comes after that, the recovering period, like kicks me badly basically. : so i prefer blocks of time. if i could four, five hours a day where i just do the science part, then i could have like some couple of hours for other stuff and then then you know go home and read a book or something (laughter) : yeah. : well it doesn't.  : right.  : five, six volumes.  : right. : ok. : so if you do more... : mhm.  : ok.  : oh, ok i feel by the nature of science, the way science works that well or maybe the way we are evaluated that there is pressure to publish. so, that means there is pressure to finish up parts of the project and sometimes i don't like it, but most of the time actually, we've, as a group, we've discovered some interesting important findings during the time, while we're trying to actually put the story together.  : so trying to understand because most of the time we could be just looking for something but unless you, unless we are actually trying to make sense of it, we can be pretty slow. so, i think.. yeah i think in a sense it's important to just keep getting products out.  : but on the other hand, and i also feel that sometimes you know if you become too productive a lot of that is just you know average stuff. so, i don't think i could be like proust to wait until i'm 60. (laughter) : but i actually only pick up, pick dali not picasso because dali i think he has even more (laughter). not sure if people, they probably do think picasso in general is more creative than dali although he was more outrageous so.   : yeah i mean so yeah i guess there is truth in that.  : mhm. : i actually feel like i have no memory besides working memory.  : i feel like i forgotten everything that i knew even five years ago and part of it is because of the need and feel that i have to keep a lot of things in my brain at one time.   : so when i was younger, i felt like i had good memory in the i guess traditional sense where i could recite poetry. now i don't remember any of it.   : so i feel like in the past ten years i... i forgot a lot of what i learned before that basically.  : and part of it is this need to juggle a lot of information. and some of it is about science, some of it is not. i mean it's just too much information that comes at me every day and too many tasks that i'm supposed to perform : at the same time to the point where basically everything that is not related to my work almost gets pushed aside. and yeah i, i rely a lot on tools also. so i rely on calendars, emails, i mean as much as i can get technology to help me yeah. i made myself read articles online so on the computer because they are searchable, because you can make the computer recognize a pattern sometimes,  : even words. so it's a lot easier. so i don't have to remember when or where some article was published.  : i just put everything in a folder and then i can search it. it's a lot easier than i think i would access it from my brain. so. : well yeah, well i don't know if this is exactly an answer to your question but i found the need to involve computational chemistry more.  : so the, the more i go because i... i think it can help kind of crystallize ideas in a sense. the computers in chemistry are very early so very at the beginning so you really need to know, you almost need to know half of your answer when you ask a question. : but, but yeah i guess that's the one thing that i try to do maybe a little bit more than other people who are in the same field as me.  : although there are people who do even more than i do. but that's, i guess i should say, i did not have training in using computational chemistry and i'm getting to the point where i want to learn a lot more. to kind of use the tools of a different field.  :  i don't know. that's a hard one because we use a lot of visualization tools.  : we use a lot of programs. but i don't know how important they are in helping me crystalize an idea or working.  : it's just they're so part of, such an intrinsic part of what we do that yeah i guess it would be hard without a visualization tools, but i never even think about it. you know they are just tools. the same way as writing on a piece of paper needs a pen or a pencil.  : i'm trying to think now. i think it's more abstract than that. i mean i do, i'm pretty sure there is some visual component to it but most of the time it's just the thought and the click.  : and so and then basically so like i know as annoying as that sounded almost comes out of nowhere, it clicks and then i start thinking about it.   : but i don't, i don't... most of the time i would actually see the visual of like the molecules or at least like a writing.    : almost. like a writing on paper type of thing.  : actually it's more the latter. when i work on something actively.  : ok.  : no i think... : i... i personally think that actually, i do believe or i mean i've noticed that people, the more creative they are the more eccentric they are. or a lot of the creative types are pretty eccentric. i do think that a big part of it is just the social construct. so it's more a desire to appear a certain way. but i think there is a balance between what i consider to be pressure and on me in a sense and part of it is pressure that i put on myself. kind of you know not to just waste my time. i don't know if that makes sense... and part of it is i guess pressure from outside but in a very indirect way. and there is probably some truth to like trying to get rid of inhibitions or using inhibitions to inhibit the typical, i don't know. it's... i don't think you have to actively look outside necessarily basically. so this whole process right like of people who want to let go or get away from the typical i think it's in my opinion is too big of a deal in a sense. i think a big part of it is a social construct. the way people think they should be perceived if they aspire to be a certain type of person. so for example, a creative type they want to be perceived in a certain way. so i think there are very you know very normal quiet people who can be very creative and was it schopenhauer who never got out of his village or his town (laughter)? : i think yeah. yeah. so i think and it probably depends a lot on the individual.  : i feel like i didn't answer that question, but i guess hopefully you get something out of it.  : sure.  : i'm kind of curious if you have or if you know or if you think there is a correlation between intelligence and creativity?  : (laughter) of course.  : but what is the scientific answer? : so what are some major factors?  : right.  : right.  : what's that.  : oh i believe in that one (laughter).  : they stress me out.  : mhm.  : right.  : so you think the tests in the mri machine basically get help.  : and do you know, have you had enough subjects : to get an idea? : right. : ok.  : mhm.  : right.  : yeah. and isn't a little bit... i find a little bit interesting that you're going at creativity with a statistical tool. (laughter) : because i, i mean i do think there are patterns to creativity but you think that there are also many individual ways that have manifest. i mean you, you gave the example with marcel proust.  : yeah i think those things are individualized right. individual based.   : although they can become a pattern right?  : having an obstacle at certain points in your life right? : ok.  : interesting, i didn't know that.  : yeah.  : yeah that sounds familiar, yeah. ok. well will i know how i score on the cognitive tests? : (laughter) because i'm very curious i mean especially the program with the arrows is driving me crazy.  : what does that test by the way.  : the arrows.  : right.  : ok.  : well i'm curious, i would be very curious to see the results. : mhm.  : right.  : (laughter) : right.  : yeah.  : i was going to say the association test killed me (laughter). : well so i have been learning english for a while, i know... i guess so i started taking lessons in sixth grade.     : so it's been a while.  : no.  : was here : 22 yeah.  : and that's one of the things actually that i find it really hard and actually very humiliating that even after this many years, all this like social language games i'm still like bit, beat basically...  : it's... i mean i think you know you get better but i feel like basically i don't know like a teenager compared to people who are at the same level. so... : i will be, especially the association tests i'm curious to see because that one i felt was very hard to see how other peoples scored and how i scored.  : oh it's ok : it's not about fair or unfair. i mean i'm sure you can still test something.  : i'm just curious.  : right. yeah.  : i mean the pattern recognition one i can understand why you do them right.  : yeah there is a logic to it. it's just a matter of whether or not you see it.  : no i get that.  : i don't know.  : (laughter) : (laughter)  : yeah sounds good.  : yeah. : that's alright. : yeah. : um hm.  : i think i like to share what's unknown, um and i like to give them the freedom to, you know, come up with interesting ways to tackle big questions. and so, as a mentor i've been told that i'm kind of demanding in wanting productivity but not really, you know, i guess micromanaging in the particular approaches that people take. : oh i think its hugely linked, and so that’s one of the reasons why i really like this profession. i feel like i have a lot of creative freedom. : (laughs) yeah, i guess i can't tell because i'm still a young person in my field, but you know the i think the best point i'm looking for as i'm staffing the lab and looking for people is a real excitement and motivation for the research questions. i feel like as long as people are really motivated by their research then the effort and creativity may follow.  : um, i think that i also look for people enjoy reading broadly. so um, i think a lot of the creativity in science comes from reading very broadly and being able to make connections um from other fields and disciplines to what we're doing. : um how do i, could you rephrase the question? : oh i see : um i think that i guess in terms in explicit efforts to do so we just try to read broadly and so we personally like to associate people from broad you know all sorts of disciplines. when i attend conferences, i enjoy a wide variety of topics and yeah keeping an open mind, its very easy to continue to just associating with those in your direct field and not being exposed to others. : yeah so i think i like similar people that seem very passionate and motivated about discovery in general that maybe propose ideas that are novel and maybe a little fringe and unusual to start with um and maybe you don’t know if its kind of a disregard for dogma or just a you know a um kind of a audacity to propose things that are against dogma, i like that. :  oh okay : neuroticism (laughs) that’s interesting  : yeah i can relate to that.  : um i guess i just don’t take it too seriously, this is something that you learn and scientists should  know you read papers and try to track down where these pretty dogmatic statements come from and their not necessarily rooted in strong evidence and so um yeah. so, you know we learn to be really skeptical things even things in textbooks and so i think that’s where this comes from. : um yeah i'm still working on it. i think that all of the research areas that i've been interested in have not been favored, so i started off studying as a grad student in some lab studying autism and environmental risk factors for autism and this was at a time where even currently genetic factors are favored and more well studied and so these were topics that were considered fringe. i think that even though right now the focus is on genetics, there's still a greater openness to environmental contributions and so that’s changed over time, and so the other topic that i became interested in is microbiome interactions with the brain, which is considered even more fringe when we started, you know, i guess i become interested in these topics that are kind of unfavored and maybe treated with some skepticism to start. : yeah i feel that i'm pretty regular but not totally. i try to sleep at normal hours, you know maybe 1 o clock til 6 or 6:30, um and then on weekdays i come in here to work. one thing though i check email very frequently so i try to stay on top of things that are going on um and then i've only recently moved here to [college 1] so now in the lab i work with people to start up a miniature experiments so like that. : um yes. i guess sometimes and then on other days then i probably may sleep in and make it up for it. : it changes, depending on you know if there's one day that sets off my schedule then i, it just changes yeah. : no. : i definitely feel that way yeah. : yes. : i do. i try to knock out emails as soon as possible and i'm not sure if that’s a productive way or not. i went to a recent meeting and people  were saying that they prefer to limit email and just check it for an hour a day or even less, but i see them when they come and i try to get them out of my box as soon as possible to feel like i'm done with them  : i've heard of him but i've never met him. : says a response (incomprehensible) : i see. i guess along those lines, i can relate in one sense in that i feel that i'm a pretty good at multitasking so doing many things at once um but then i guess my long term memory is not that great. so as i’ve said, i'd like to finish something and get it out and then i may forget it maybe within, depending on what it is a couple days so there are they're just certain things that i'm not if i maybe if it doesn’t make to the top priority list i just don’t remember it well. but things i am thinking about it, i feel like i can think about many things at once. for tools, i keep my life is in google calendars like as everyone probably uses it, but i plan out every little thing on there or else i won't know what i'll be doing that day. um and other tools, i like to be in terms of the emails and just being connected with people i actually enjoy it, so and people email me because i feel like they're connecting to me, and so i also keep um like a twitter - this is pretty recent - but i keep a twitter feed i like feeling connected with information and people of my field and maybe people outside of my field ,so i just like to keep up with information. : haha sure. : yeah  : oh i see. : well kind of every - i don’t know if this is uh in contrast to what i said about my micromanaging, i don’t really... the people in my lab keep calendars too, planning their bigger experiments, so that how i keep track of what's going on with that without having to verbally bug anyone about exactly what they're doing. so people in the lab plan their experiments i can see them all on these several calendars. then i have a personal calendar where i keep travel plans and meetings like this, and um when there's time i try to add you know personal things on the to do list if i want to. today, i want to learn about one new area of research i'm going to block out a time and schedule it. : i guess so yeah. : no, i guess i just use google calendars a lot for myself and i thought that it would be useful as a planning tool for others and um i haven't really mandated that people use it but a lot of them have adopted it. : oh okay that’s interesting. : um so... i'm not sure this is exactly related but i feel that i... um (laughs) i guess this is what i'm seeing in with some people that are working in the lab in that there will be protocols and they will learn from these protocols and follow things step by step, down to the t and i guess i don’t know if this is a disregard or if it's just being messy, but i feel like i have less inclination to follow things exactly as they say. and so i kind of question whether things are necessary or not. and so although i understand this is what protocol says or this is how things should be done, i sometimes will think that maybe there's a better way or maybe there are things that are not needed. : um yeah if it's not i feel like it's not required. if it's important to replicate something then of course i want to follow it exactly, but yeah when you're developing new techniques or starting new experiments. : yeah i can relate to both. when it comes to experiments, i feel like i'm closer to the just do it  you know we don’t know... i feel like there's no use in arguing over it about what we don’t know we should just do it and see what happens um yeah so i can relate to that and then on the other side i do, kind of relating to what we're saying about reading broadly, i do read broadly and things, take time to think, to come up with ideas yeah. along the lines of memory, one thing that i realized over time is that i'm actually really not that great at recalling. i'm not really good at recall of specific facts. i feel like i'm good at finding information and big picture ideas but yeah. i'm really terrible at recalling things as you’ve said that are done and are in the past : no : i think so based on what you said and what everyone says i have terrible memory in terms of recall (laughs). : yeah that’s a really really common thing i'll get. they'll say remember when we did this and then i say no (laughs). : well, i mean that i think that they're definitely stereotypes and part of it is because of just being an implicit biases right, and at the same time i do... i mean there's this literature this area... just talking about tendencies of women in academic versus men and that women are not as likely to self promote or to ask for a raise whereas men are not. so that's actually published findings, you might be aware already of them and so i guess that’s something that may be different. aside from that, just very basic literature about male brains and female brains and differences in baseline you know molecular differences between them. i'm kind of hesitant to say that there are actual cognitive differences because i don’t want to fall into a stereotype. i want to believe that there's little differences in terms of ability, but i rely on what's been published at least in terms of tendencies of men versus women. : right right. : yeah, also whether it’s a stereotype or if it’s er, i don’t know this literature as well, but if women are more likely... oh well i guess this i think this is maybe valid for disorders like depression or one ideas that more common in women because they are more likely to voice it, whereas men don't voice these concerns but i'm not sure how much that’s true.  : oh okay, interesting. : right right okay. : i see. : um... i think you spoke before about narcissism and masochism yeah um. i think actually, i haven't... you know this is actually the thought even as i went in to do the scan as i when i was approached, is that i don’t feel i guess i always put myself in perspective in that i never considered myself very creative, because i always see others that do things that are... i kind of feel like i have this um tendency to not really be narcissistic because i'm always... you know i like reading about other people's achievements and i like reading about other people's creativity, and so i always feel that i'm pretty average, yeah. : i don’t know if that’s related to anything : i think i, you know one person said that i kind of... it seems like i live in the future because by the time these things arrive i have a moment of you know of excitement i'm glad to have these honors but then it's very fleeting, and then it's on to the next thing. and so i don’t really i think i don’t appreciate things as much as other people do (laughs). although i'm glad i have these achievements. i always feel like there's more to be done. : i feel like i had a pretty normal childhood. well, i did grow up in a single parent household and so very... i mean i don’t know if had anything to do with it - also i grew up and no one else in the family is a scientist so i had a lot of the arts in when i was growing up. so, my father was a musician that passed away when i was very young and so i studied music a lot when i was younger and art and dance and so all things leaning towards the arts and i'm the only currently still the only scientist in the family. what drew me to it, was as we mentioned and discussed earlier, was the creative freedom, feeling like i get to decide what to do and i have big questions and we get to decide what to study and i really enjoy that.  : umm lets see, 7. : when she younger yes. so she met my father because she actually took music lessons with him. yeah so she always has enjoyed the arts but its worked her professions on the business side and yeah. : uh well i wanted to have a career when i was younger. i studied music i have a lot of instruments. i enjoy new instruments so my home has a lot of instruments, but i don’t really currently do too much on that end.  : i grew up learning how to play piano but i pick up instruments and try to learn them on my own and more recently i became really interested and in kind of newer electronic instruments and so things like there are these new keyboards that have touch sensors on each of the keys and they're mixed with the synthesizers and so i like that. there's also this new instrument called the eigenharp that’s really strange but a mix of electronics and touch sensitivity and different ways to play it i find them interesting. : yeah a fraction of people like the old way, very natural organic but i like technology. i think its fun and interesting and so that shows in the lab so i was previously in the lab where there were some people that would be mad even if you had your laptop during a meeting and i thought that was the strangest thing (laughs). airing on being luddite, you know. so, i really like technology and new things. : no, i don’t think so. i feel like i just try to and day to day aside from meetings like this as we were discussing i feel like a very normal person. i like doing you know... experiencing life i don’t like to keep people in the lab for all day all night and every weekend. i like to encourage people to have you know work life balance and hopefully things that you experience in normal life will inspire you at work. : we work at the interface between gene regulation and immunology, so i primarily interact with the immunology and the molecular immunology world but my training and expertise is much more in gene regulation and biochemistry and molecular biology so we are a fairly unusual quite an unusual lab in working at that interface, but understanding gene regulation is huge within in the immunology field now but there are very few immunologists that are actually trained to do it and the people that are trained in the gene regulation field are you know are run from the immunology field because of the jargon and the complexity of it, they just don’t want to its hard to move into the immunology field. : well i mean with training. i was fortunate to be trained in really good places and great mentors i was you know trained as a graduate student one of the leading gene regulation labs in the world at [university 1] in [scientist 1] lab who's now president of [medical institute] and then did my postdoc with [scientist 2] who's you know was more of an not really an immunologist but his lab was doing more immunology at that time but you know but really through his lab primarily emphasized immunology and only learned a little bit... primarily emphasized gene regulation i only learned pieces of the immune system and i more continued to move in that direction since i got here that just realizing that there's you know that it's been really nice to work at that interface because whenever we design a project or a direction, we you know are always thinking about two goals. we don’t want to be a lab that's just applying current understanding of gene regulation to the immune system. we don’t want to just apply what we know and understand the biology of the immune system. we want to design projects where we have a chance of learning things that are going to advance our understanding of immunology, so there are going to be of interest to immunologists, but at the same time we want the projects to break new ground on fundamental principles of gene regulation. so, it's been nice because it gives us two chances to get do something that somebody cares about you know because we design projects depending on the results, the gene regulation community may really care because its teaching us something about gene regulation mechanisms that are new fundamental principles and maybe we don't learn so much about biology and so the immunologists don’t care that much, but other projects you know are hoping to learn something about gene regulation that doesn't always work out, but we learned something that’s important for immuno-networks that the immunologists care about so you know it gives us twice the chance to do something that doesn’t end up in the trash. that’s worked well and that's really shaped the design of all our projects because every project really thinking about both of those goals you know and that makes us different because most immunologists would be designing projects based solely on wanting to understand something about the immune system whereas as we are... that’s never a sufficient for what we want to do  : yeah well i think there's things that i learned from them and then other things that i think were maybe more personal characteristics that were not as much learned from them. those labs, i think that the [scientist 1's] lab as a graduate student was just an incredibly high quality experimental science that you know that’s very high standards that you know that you really pushing toward doing um you know experiments fearlessly you know thinking about what the goal is that’s in mind not the you know scared off just because it might be hard... to do the experiments might be harder and maybe you can do something easier that would lead to a publishable paper that was never you now the goal was always to do the most um you know important experiments no matter how difficult they would be that was always the philosophy of the lab that and it was never really i remember a time as a young student where there was a fear among another student that another lab was about to publish you know something very similar and [scientist 1's] reponse was well doesn’t really matter if they publish first because ours is going to be a lot better and that was always the philosophy of the lab was that the feeling that nobody in the world can compete with the lab in terms of the quality of the science going to be done and it really was just a technically outstanding lab, but it was also just unbelievably intense huge amount of pressure. very hard working lab. you know you went to if you even dared to you know go out to dinner on a  saturday night you were pretty sure you had to come back to the lab afterwards until midnight or one there was literally no days off the unfortunate five years so it was very very intense and always very competitive among the people that were in the lab people were collegial, but it was very stressful situation. so i always tell people that i you know where that's where i learned to do good experiments, but then in the baltimore lab is where i learned actually enjoy science because there was a very different environment. so um and i think you know what was really valuable there was that [scientist 2] was just really again he was not a really concerned about competition. he just loved science and was if somebody competitor something that would never happen in [scientist 1's] lab competitor published a truly great results you know that would irritate [scientist 1] to no end but [scientist 2] would love it he say this is great science i love it you know doesn’t it was real joy of just seeing the field progress and you know and that was you know just really helpful for me to see that’s what we all should really be doing is that we should all be not just there for the competition, but you know we should all be enjoying you know the progress of science even if we're not doing it ourselves. and so that was good it was a great unbelievably smart people that i always felt you know far inferior to, but they were very you know just amazing group of accomplished people with a very high level of self confidence that they interacted very well with each other because they all had high self-esteem. they didn’t feel they needed to be competing that they could all support each other, they could all be collegial wonderful environment i mean they time that i was there was you know. so those were all influences that and i don’t think in terms of most of my technical and really experimental training was in graduate school, not much from the postdoc training. : yeah so i think it is just you know the thing that always drove me that i'm not really sure came from the training in either place because... maybe a little bit from my graduate training, but even within those groups of people my mind always moved toward this idea of what is the... you know can we understand the big picture logic? you know is there something other than just doing experiments and doing pieces of things? it's got to all fit together some way and there's got to some logic and the feeling that the only way you can get to that logic is to you know actively think about it and design you know experiments based on you know having a vision for where you want to end up you know in 30 years from now as opposed to end up in just having a publishable paper i think that was something that i noticed you know probably i think i didn’t notice it until graduate my postdoc, but i think it was something starting to emerge even before then. : yeah i think its just really um you know designing studies you know just designing directions you know based on 30 year view. not based on the you know immediate view. we haven't got caught up in fads and you know. we haven't you know... we think where we... and i think that’s been... not been a challenge. that we have to make sure that is then emphasized strongly in grant application you know that yes it may not be over the next five year period that you have to make sure the reviewer understands that the goal was not just to you know get us to the end of the five years, that the goal was to take steps toward what we think might take us thirty years to go and i don’t think that's been very difficult for, except in the current nih system where you just sometimes complete randomness in review process, but usually reviewers will you know understand, will get it that if its clearly articulated that where you want to go, what steps you've already made, and accomplishments you've made. what you think is the next step. why is it an important step and a necessary step where you want to go. i think its we haven't have a lot of difficulty getting people to understand that this is a long-term process. : well, i haven't had to submit a grant for 3 years so we'll see how it goes. i think its gotten the crisis deepened over the last 3 years and about trying to find the time to write now.  : in my fields certainly i'm modest in my section that the biggest frustration is that over the last five years the quality of reviewers has dropped has plummeted dramatically that they just you know and i'm not exactly sure why. if its entirely a problem with just the better reviewers saying no, or if it’s a selection process and they are under pressure to have geographic diversity and you know gender and ethnic diversity on the review panels and you know that constrains the choice of reviewers to some extent so. but it's been really frustrating to see the quality go down so much that you know that being on the review panel there's still a handful of us that are reasonably accomplished that are on the panel and we just all just are just so become so frustrated with the process because people that you know just should not be there are having (muts?) and some of them are very vocal fight for things that they... : so that’s been so that just leads to this entire randomness just entirely depend on... there's no clear set of standards or criteria that applicants are trying to achieve, its just a luck of the draw who the reviewers are if someone's going to be supportive or not.  : it's just... i think that the one of the influences is just that i look back i don’t think would have been good at anything else you know, that i i'm very much an introvert. i've always been an introvert. so um so the thought of going into field like business or law or even medicine you're where your advancement and your successes is dependent much more on interaction with other humans, (laughs) would have been much more of a challenge for me you know. so that’s one thing that i think that drew me to this profession over time. although, i didn’t know i wanted to do this until i went to graduate almost by default because i really didn’t have any idea what i wanted to do when i graduated from college and i had a professor that suggested i go to graduate school. i hadn't applied and it was april of my senior year of college and application deadlines were over and i was going to go out and get a job, and i had a professor who said you know maybe we can get you into graduate school at [university 1] just because you you know he just called someone and i applied in april and they accepted me so they just... and it was really just one professor who actually you know and it wasn’t someone i was working for just someone else in the department that you know took an interest. but um, you know its hard to know. i have... although i am introvert which then causes me to shy away from interactions, i also do have a lot of confidence in my thoughts, so that i think that’s necessary for kind of directing my research in ways that might be against a little bit of the grain at times that you know i always had confidence in my own judgements and that i think comes from you know stable childhood background, supportive parents, all these kinds of things that probably helped a lot of people. although i did debate this with my neighbor, [scientist 3], over in [name of laboratory 1] who's national academy member and his career was entirely driven by the strife he had and lack of support he had from his family and you know desire to try to prove himself to the world with a really difficult background. mine was completely the opposite with a very supportive environment. : (inaudible phrase) so that’s but yeah... and i always... i never was a... i was not a science you know, i was not a science geek, i was not... i did not like science fiction unlike  a lot of scientists. i really never had a you know a passion for science until i was graduate school really, but what i enjoyed a lot was puzzles and i think the science that we do is really it kind of all fits together. we're trying to understand this puzzle of the genome and you know how it all... i think there's a connection there. i think that’s really what made me enjoy was part that i see tof puzzle. : i did jigsaw puzzles even now that i my family knows that if that they cant give if they give me  jigsaw puzzle its going to completely destroy my productivity for the next you know 'til its finished because i... : yeah if it's there i got to do it. i'll stay up until 1 o clock 2 o clock in the morning and i won't have to do it right away. i can spread it out a little bit, but i cant really rest until its done. : is that right? : so they can't... they’ve learned that can be a good thing because they know i like it, but on the other hand, they can be very disruptive to the rest of our lives because it completely changes my schedule 'til it's done and my brother's kind of the same way. although he's very different in almost every other way, but that’s one thing that we share that if we have a family get together and they bring a puzzle we both are like sitting there and its all we want do to so we have that common genetic trait whatever it is. : how do you define agreeable? because i'm thinking about it two different ways and i'm wondering the two possible definitions... interviewer: yeah, so the kinds of questions that are tapping into that construct you know have to do with whether you know people tend to go along with the opinions of others and you know are enjoy making other people happy and you know trying to satisfy others expectations and some people not so much. they really will you know always or stick to their guns, tend to do what they think is right regardless of what other people will think of them and not care as much of what people will think about them.: right i think that would be... so i still think there's two possible ways to look at it that. i would say i'm that not agreeable in a sense i'm very critical i have my own way of thinking of things and don’t go along just because someone feels something different, i will outwardly express my opinions. but, i'm also in the sense of being agreeable, i you know i consider myself a more of a optimist and positive person and maybe i guess i don’t know if its part of it rather than... and even though i'm really critical of other people, i try not to just be a downer in every situation and i do try to make people feel good... especially people that are working for me and administrative assistants... : i try to bend over backwards to not be... : no, and i think that’s influences me but i try to bend over backwards to you know make people feel appreciated, especially staff. you know graduate students need criticism to improve, but staff that are working that i try to be positive and supportive in that sense. : yeah i think that’s really that you know... i just from my own lab and so from the md phd program and teaching you know undergraduate administrative jobs as well that i'm now stepping down from. but yeah, no i think that mentorship has been um you know a big deal that i think it's important to be you know to pay attention and be critical. i think it goes - with the lab people it goes along with the general success of the lab because the same types of feedback... well actually it doesn’t always. i mean i... you know i do see faculty where they're guidance of their students is really directed around just their own personal self interest and their career and hopes to keep students in the lab longer than they should just because they don’t want to let them go and you know pushing them in ways that would benefit the career of the mentor rather than the career of the mentee. i don’t think i do that at all, but just in terms of giving critical feedback, makes their science better and also makes them better and makes them more you know competitive in the future. so, i think there's and alignments you know between mentorship and my own goals, but there are times where they diverge and that there's times you really have to be i think you it's important i try really hard to be... to really recognize the you know that there's maybe a conflict in my self interest and the trainee's self interests and the trainee's self interest needs to be put first, and i know that's not always the case and i even wonder what the most creative people might do about that because they could be the ones that are not considering the trainee as much as their own self interest. i really don’t know. but yeah, i think i'm really proud of my of large group of people that have gone off and are running their own labs and i take great pride in that and i interact with them all still extensively and support them you know because that’s... that brings - helps me as well because its recognized in the field that a new team of people have come out of my lab that have done well so i think that’s all important.  : but its about yes the lab its about half of the former graduate students are now you know running their own labs and doing really well and the other half you know not so much, but you look at what they were like as trainees and it was pretty predictable who was going to end up where just... : yeah you can't... i was just talking to somebody about that earlier today about i don’t think you can tell when you first meet them, but certainly when they're working in the lab. amazingly, the biggest predictor of just whether someone is able to continue through their career and get an independent faculty position and get nih grants and do reasonably well, the biggest predictor is just work ethic. it's just the ones who are working really hard and persistent and determined are the ones who are getting there. it's you now, it's not as closely connected to technical skill or to intellect, but you know but they somewhat come together you know they are the same level because the ones that are working hard enough and are most persistent end up learning... at least getting enough knowledge. once they get their own labs, then you know their work ethic still seems to be the biggest predictor whether they get their own labs and whether get funded, but whether they truly achieve and make become leaders in their field with my trainees, then you can start seeing the difference intellect and how that’s some influence. you know i have a couple good examples of really hard hard workers very persistent that have done really well in going through getting a postdoc, getting a job, getting well funded, but then are not quite going beyond toward becoming a leader because you know they're kind of limited you know you see limitations in their ability to design innovative projects you know and whereas others that might have been not quite as hard working but also really hard workings, then you can see the contributions of their intellectual abilities you know driving them toward more achievements and independent decisions. : that’s interesting. : yeah i think it's- i mean you won't find that in you know my publication record. we don’t have a huge number of publications and, but that’s the nature of the field and the science. if you look at other scientists this type of mechanistic dissection, you know for a typical graduate in my lab if i were generally shooting for like one paper per graduate student at the time they are there because it takes the amount of depth to do something significant that’s really what you're hoping for. so in terms of how you would measure that, there's a certainly... i think it still comes down to the... you know that there's certainly a big boost to the people that are working really hard, but it cant be easily measured across disciplines and numbers and papers probably if you can't merge them because a lot of fields where people are getting enormous numbers of papers that are maybe not as much impact or so... um but yeah somebody that’s really really smart and creative, i've had people like that in the lab really smart really creative in a certain sense, but they just can't get themselves at the bench and do stuff and that’s you know that easily does not result in success unless they are in [university 2] because there's some things i've seen from working in [university 2], working here, you know that there's a um you know that there was a handful of trainees working at [university 3] that you know that would end up in this having this aura around them as being just unbelievably intelligent people that would get the respect of everybody around them because they were just so impressive, but at the end of a day there's a subset of those that actually you know really didn’t when you look at why why is this they didn’t actually do anything but they are so intellectually impressive that they still rise and they still capture the attention of everyone around them. there's not many of them, but you would see that... i just never see that here. i've never seen it in [university 1]. i've never seen it here. i only saw it in [university 2] where you that seems to be... : yeah i think where it's sufficient to establish a career based on your intellect, rather than your actually having accomplished something and i think it’s an unique you know thing that happens in [university 2]. : yeah that’s... others have seen this. i've certainly had these conversations you know just isn't the same and kind of a curious trait of the [university 2] you know academic community. that’s not a generalization. there's a host of people that are you know highly regarded in [university 2] are just really productive and doing great things just occasionally see those and say, "wow that person's smart," but you got to sometimes look at what they’ve done. : so memory. i think i have a really bad memory and my family will confirm that. i have horrible memory and i think that goes to science as well. i don’t... i'm not very good at keeping up on literature so i don’t even get to read much to even get have a chance of having a memory, but i probably do remember the things that are critical for what we are doing well, you know, over a long period of time but and somehow but if i read something and decided you know after reading it that it just doesn’t capture my attention being something that’s useful for what we are trying to do um, i tend to forget it right away. but if it really is critical for what we are specifically trying to achieve, then i remember probably really well, but that’s a very small fraction most of what is other people do and we read as not relevant to what we are really trying to do.  : yeah i can... : no i can't. i'm not good with computers, but so i... i do remember experiments done in our lab really well um and you know because those are relevant to what we're trying to do and i do get surprised when sometimes you know when i'm trying to balance you know 14 projects in the lab and i remember the experiments done you know a year or two ago by students better than they do but where you'd think that’s they're only thinking about one project they would be able to remember what they did a year ago in greater detail than i'm remembering it, but often i remember it better than they do. : they often have to go back and look at their notebooks to remember what they did. : yeah i think they're really relevant to yeah what were they because they are relevant to what we're... so i guess i just kind of naturally filter out stuff that doesn’t matter or stuff i perceive as not mattering, but things... you know the small subset of things... tiny tiny subsets of things that does matter that’s those are the things that probably are actively being jumping around my mind constantly.  : no.  : that’s probably more likely yeah...  : i do remember what i had for breakfast today, but i certainly don’t remember dinner or breakfast yesterday, so.  : so whether... just the concept of whether you can... you know uh suppress a have something that’s more of a habit and do something different.  : that’s a harder one to pinpoint than the other questions because i don’t... it's something i never thought about or paid attention to. actually.... one thing that comes to mind is in doing experiments that there's... generally you're going into an experiment with uh expectation of what the result is that you want that would support a hypotheses and um there seems to be one of the tendency of the field to really give preferential thought to things that support a hypothesis and you know whether you know and fail to consider you know alternatives as to why are results made... um you know is not necessarily supporting... just alternative interpretations of a result and so i think i do certainly in that lab meetings i see that interacting with the community that you know students will do an experiment they that their mind is just fixated on the idea that yeah this you know i can interpret and support what i really wanted to see and they are very used to me sitting there and saying yeah but there's all these reasons why it may not that you really need to dig deeper into this and you know so i don’t know if its addressing what you're really asking but i think i do have a very strong ability to be objective in evaluating things. to not let personal biases or hopes you know cloud my view of what i'm seeing and i  think that’s a i think a big problem where we all its in science the types of studies being done in genomics and that its very easy to find whatever you want if you're not you know working really really hard to maintain objectivity and to consider and that’s why i think i know a high percent - one of the reasons such a high percentage of papers that are published are probably down right wrong because people are going through entire studies where they're looking for what they want to see and i don’t think they're intentionally trying to be deceiving, but they just can't consider alternatives and they say this supports it and this supports it and this supports it. let's find what we can that supports what my mind is and you see that in my students and i... you know i'm i think really good at - even though there are some great papers we could of published if i believed things that you know turned out to be wrong, but you see things and you say this well this looks great. on the other hand, there are all these other interpretations so we need to dig deeper and we dig deeper and we find out that you know the there was all there was nothing significant there at the end of the day.  : no. : oh really that would be... : and i actually think that leads to.... that because of that, there's a very much misplaced emphasis on hypothesis driven research that especially given that so many people do have trouble remaining objective when they're doing hypothesis driven research, that you know that i think most of the key things that we've done have involved just dissecting and analyzing something in great detail without really caring what we are going to find ,you know just you know it's not hypothesis driven. the goal is to analyze and put together and solve the puzzle you know but if we but we're pursuing things you know that if we started with a hypothesis we you know there's no way we have it right because there's so many possibilities toward what really is happening. : so it drives me nuts when you see reviewers saying well this isn't hypothesis driven. : uh no i think you got it all its yeah. : this is all self-reporting. i guess all has flaws as well because there's no other way you can... : just don't put anything in it... if it's a public clip, don't put anything in it that looks... yeah... : destroy my career right there. : i hate self-promotional things. that's why i... i once, only once ever, and this is just personal preference – i don't care if anybody else does this – but um only once you know had agreed to have the media people write a little blurb on the [university 5] homepage about things we were doing. they just tainted it and caused so much anxiety that i just never want to do it again. it's my introvert... or introversion.  : great! : that's why i think my new job in the [name of laboratory 2] is good for me because it's a job where i can work hard and have an impact, but i don't have to, i'm not a public face. i can lead [pt's employee 1] and [pt's employee 2] up there doing all the public interaction and i kinda had a choice between doing that job, the [job title 1] job or becoming chair of my department and, you know, the chair job seemed too public for me. the [job title 2] position was like, well i can hide behind [pt's employee 1] and [pt's employee 2] and just do the work. so that's where i like to be. : it's really... it's unbelievable how constant meeting... this is a good day... only three meetings today! because it's a holiday. : no, it's actually good for me because i know so little about what's going on in this end of campus, so i do need to kind of have a better understanding for decisions that will come up over the years.  : for the [science institute]... is that? : i though it would even be higher... : that makes sense i guess because you're only a part of the neuroscience. if you put all of the neuroscience together, it's like, you know 30% or 40% or something like that. : but the [science institute] alone, i guess makes about 15%. for being a non-neuroscientist, we just seeing how big neuroscience is overall with [science institute] and neurobiology and neuroscience and everything together... it's really massive and dominates the campus. it's a little hard for a non-neuroscientist to be in my position because there's so much i don't know what's going on here, but since [pt's employee 1] and [pt's employee 2] both are, you couldn't really bring another neuroscientist into my position. they had to have a little bit of a representation of the rest of the campus, so... : oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. : um, i would say of all the things i've done in my research career, the thing that i am the most proud is the... is doing that first imaging genetics paper where we looked at a common polymorphism, a risk common polymorphism, in a normal population using functional imaging and found the polymorphism differences which was the first paper that led to the field of imaging genetics.  so that's probably what i'm most proud of. : well, it was an interesting paper.  i actually didn’t like the paper that much when i first did it.  it just wasn't as clean and neat as i would have liked, but it was a... well, the reason why i'm most proud of it is of course because it has led to this new field and the field is extremely exciting, i think surprising in many ways, and that is the notion that just a single change in your genetic structure, a single snip, something very, very small that you would think out of the billion of genes would have no effect, in fact has an effect on the brain and the effects of the brain are more sensitive than the effects on behavior.  and i guess that makes sense if you think about it, but it hadn't been thought about before.  there had never been an idea before that a simple genetic variation could affect something that you could see so vividly in brain structure or brain function in this case.  and, so it basically, it gave a new category, a phenotype.  so, instead of thinking of a phenotype as a behavioral characteristic, phenotype suddenly became a brain characteristic.  so, it just opens up tremendous possibilities for study, not just in looking at genetic effects of the brain or looking at risk genes, but also things like thinking of brain measures as dependent measures in, for example, intervention studies, where maybe behavior is not so sensitive.  it's a variable.  it's a variable across individuals, it's a variable across testing sessions, but the brain don't lie, right?  so, if you made a change in what you're brain is doing, and you're able to see that, then it just gives you tremendous more power to ask more questions though that will be important for, i mean for medicine, but also just for knowledge.  : luck.    : i think i'm... i've been tremendously fortunate.  yeah, i have a problem also saying good things about myself, so.  : yeah, i think i've been very fortunate.  i've always been in the right place at the right time.  i guess if i would say that there's any general characteristic that made this thing possible, it is... it is the ability or just the willingness just to jump on new things and explore new ideas.  i think when i was in graduate school and studying science, that the model for science was that you choose an area, a niche, that you yourself are interested in, and it's sort of like a direct line.  you do this study, and then the next study... you have this long, linear path that defines you as a scientist is doing one thing.  and, i've never ascribed to that model of science.  in fact, i think that a single road followed in one direction leads absolutely nowhere.  i had a great example of that actually.  when i was in graduate school i was doing research in the lab of a professor who had recently retired and he'd left this whole lab with all of his work left in it, so this huge lab with all of this equipment, it was all, i think, dichotic listening equipment and he had piles and piles and reams of data on dichotic listening that he had spent, you know, his fifty year career working on.  and of course, by when he retired, it was a completely morbid field.  it was dead.  and i thought, oh my god, this guy spent his entire career and all of his life's work is sitting around me.  his equipment, his papers, all of his data, and it's trash.  and isn't that just awful.  so, anyway, that was very... that was, for me, a sign of how not to do science.  so, i think that if i would say anything about what i have done that's different is that i never decided follow a single path and that i found interesting things and zipped off into directions.  people would think i was crazy for doing so many different kinds of things, but you never know what's going to turn out cool. : yeah, i really do, and it is by definition, because you test a hypothesis.  so you generate a hypothesis based on the ideas that were and you generate the next naturally logical hypothesis and you test that and that's all you get, right?  you get what you tested.  you only see what you've looked for and so you can keep on doing that forever and only see what you're looking for years and years and years, but now, you know, now i like to tell my students to come up with great ideas for stuff to do, but let the data speak to you.  the data will tell you the story of what was true, and you can test those things more directly later, but let the data talk to you and tell you what the truth is.   : yeah, it's more like darwinian than, you know, than... well than... : yes, helmholtz, i was going to say pavlovian, but that too.  yeah.   : um, gosh... um, you know i'm not easily cowed,  which has been helpful, i think, to me in my career.  um, gosh, even sexism which has always been an obstacle has been a joy to overcome so i can't cite that... time probably.  the number of hours in the day.  just enough time to get stuff done that you want to do.  : what? : well that's a really fantastic but impractical idea.  : the main advice that i give, well i give a couple of pieces of advice, but the main thing i tell my students is that the way that science works is that you come up with ideas, you know you throw some paper or idea out there, and then the job of all other scientists to do whatever they can to shoot it down and it's those ideas that revive this onslaught of, you know, ferocity, survive, so that the main advice that i give to people is to not take things personally.  do not take criticism personally.  in fact, go out and seek feedback as much as you can.  for people's first paper i always say, before you send it out to a journal, think about the scariest person you can and send it to a scary person and get feedback so you can get over the idea of how bad it feels to get your work rejected or to be criticized because if you don't have tough skin, you just can't make it.  so, that's my top advice. : i really would like to say i got into it with great forethought, but i think i got into it by accident.  i was happened to be in the [research center] at a critical time and i only got to the [research center] because my then husband had gotten post doc there so i was calling around and found some guys in the epilepsy group because i was an epilepsy neuropsychologist, so they happened to have a position so i happened to go.  and so at the [research center] they had a cool new thing called a pet scanner and so i think that a lot of success is seeing what is around you and taking advantage of the, you know, of what's there and going in weird directions, so i thought, that's cool, this pet scanner, people had just started doing their first studies of motor and the one language study published and i was working with patients so i thought how cool would it be to use this to map language in patients pre-surgically rather than having them go through the horrible procedures that we were then putting them through, so that's when i started studying imaging and then i was very fortunate to have been there at the same time that functional mri was invented and we happened to have a fast scanner we could to do echo planar imaging, so again, just taking advantage of the new stuff that was coming along that happened to be there at the same time.  so, that's how i got into it, i just happened to be in the right place and where i could ask new questions and we had tools.   : you know, i don't really know.  i was always interested in the brain.  i always knew i was going to be a medical researcher, i mean when i was in high school certainly i knew that... and i always thought it was going to be brain, i was always interested in psychology.  um, i mean i was interested in physics and i actually started out as a physics major, but i was always interested in psychology and how the brain worked and then when i went to graduate school at a program, which was back then one of the few programs that actually had a specialty in neuropsychology at [university 1], is a guy named [pt's mentor 1], and i think that we learned that we, a lot of our paths are chosen by people that we admire.  he was a neuropsychologist and i very much admired him.  but it was kind of like an addiction thing really.  like you discover this and this is just the coolest thing ever.   : i mean, interestingly, i've had very few mentors and role models in my career.  [pt's mentor 1] was my first and i would say my last real mentor and role model.   he was, and you know, of course all of them are limited in their own ways, he was a really interesting, well that's not true he was not the only one, [pt's mentor 2] was another one. he was very interested in neuropsychology, taught me a lot, was also very scattered and kind of never there.  but the good news about that was that he gave me the freedom to do whatever i wanted, so i did.  so maybe that was a good role model in the end.  and then in my internship, my mentor was a guy named [pt's mentor 2] who had actually gotten his phd at [university 1] also.  and, that's when i first really was immersed in neuropsychology and epilepsy and the harder to diagnose neuropsychological cases and we would sit for hours and hours talking about the brain.  so it was great just to have somebody like that who wanted to discuss the weirdness of the brain and would covell in how cool the brain was and talk about cases.  that was my last sort of, i don't know if i would call them exactly either of them a role model.  in many ways, they were not role models.  they were shitty role models because a lot of them, both of them didn’t finish stuff.  they didn't get papers written, they didn’t have big research careers.  they were smart guys who were overwhelmed with details and too much to do and just weren't pushing the research end, but they were role models in showing interest in science and just sparking interest.  after that, my mentor, well my other mentor at [university 2] was a guy named [pt's mentor 3] who i was pregnant at the time and who felt it necessary every day that i came in how wrong it was for women to have babies who had careers at the same time.  so, he was an anti-role model, yeah.  and then at the [research center] my mentor, well my first mentor was [pt's mentor 4].  i wouldn't even call him a mentor, he was just the guy that i worked for.  he basically left me alone, i think he was a little scared of me, so i went off and did my own stuff which was good because he would have, you know, he also was not productive, but he didn't want anyone else to be either so i had to work to spite him.  and then i switched over to [pt's mentor 5's] lab, there was a branch review and then everyone was reconstructed.  and [pt's mentor 5], i mean i love [pt's mentor 5], really, really brilliant guy, terrible mentor, you know never sat down and helped me with papers, taught me how to do stuff, again, left me alone.  so, all of my mentors from then on completely left me alone.  i mean honestly.  the closest thing i had to a mentor back then was a boyfriend who taught me some of the specifics of imaging and we did studies together and that was that.  yeah, so pretty much i was on my own.  but, i'm used to being on my own so i made sense to me.   : i do.  yeah.  i was raised by a dad and i had two brothers, so all male family,  and my dad was a narcissistic son of a bitch and he always spoke without regard to others but always with great assuredness, and i had no other role model for communication other than to always be completely sure of myself, so that really takes you a long way because if you really believe what you're saying and express it to other people, other people will believe you too even if you're totally freaking wrong.  um, so i found that to be very beneficial in my career just to have, to never... like i was never, i know so many women taught to say the polite thing.  i was never taught to say the polite thing.  i never had a role model of women should be quiet or you should just go along with the crowd, never had that role model... so, i think made it easier for me to compete in a world that's very male dominated and expects women to shut up.  i mean there was no way anyone was ever going to make me shut up.   : negative. : i mean, i like to think that i'm pretty agreeable because i think i'm relatively nice, i hope i'm relatively nice, but i'm not agreeable in the sense that i don't go along with things for the sake of going along with things.  : right.  and even more than that is almost like a drive to disagree with someone who thinks for sure what they're doing without having thought it through. : oh, it's extremely important.  that's one of the best things that i do.  i am constantly mentoring students, i've got lots of them.  i think particularly for young women its very important to have a role model for a woman who has had a family and also a career and hasn't compromised on either.  i think that's very important and, yeah... just to, you know, continue the profession and teach women to get ahead, you know overcoming a lot of the obstacles that other women had that i did not.   : you know, i'm pretty selective in my graduate students who come to the lab.  yes, i think i can tell.  i think that students who come in that are... so what i do is they have to do rotations.  i typically give them a project that i absolutely cannot do and i don't give them any instruction.  so, the... so, because i think that to be successful in science, you have to be very resourceful and you have to be able to do things on your own... go ahead if you need to take that... -interviewer takes phone call- : no problem. : oh, yes.  i was just saying that... : i tend to leave them on their own and the resourceful people, it's not how smart they are, it's how resourceful they are.  the people that can go in and find solutions for themselves without relying on others, without being told what to do... that is my first sign.  and then the other thing i tell students, you know when i'm first interviewing them, is that being a scientist is a really hard job.  it’s really insecure.  you don't where you're money is coming from.  you have to be at the top of your game always and for the rest of your career and so you should never do it unless you are compelled by the power of satan to do so.  and they are compelled by the power of satan, then they should do it.  [scientist 1] calls it "fire in the belly" and i think that's another was of putting it.  they have to be both driven and resourceful and those are the qualities i look for.   : um, well, i don't know that i would say that they bring different qualities to the game.  i think women are trained to act differently than men and one of the main, maybe they're innately made to act differently than men.  women are much more likely, as the research shows, to try to form collaborations and build consensus.  i think a lot of the male scientists are more likely to follow their own lead and tend to be a little less concerned about others and can get away with a  greater level of arrogance than most women do.  so i think that many single-minded, often narcissistic males can be very successful.  i don't necessarily makes a good scientist.  it may often make them a well known scientist, but that doesn't necessarily make them good ones because i think that you can get far by ignoring other people and by being driven to help yourself.  i think women scientists, i know and i'm speaking general because it's by no means universal...i know women who are exactly like the stereotypical male which i described, tend to do more in terms of collaboration.  i personally find that building collaborations, which is almost all of my research is collaborative, just gives an opportunity to do more interesting things and come up with more interesting ideas and i think that since more women are trained to be more agreeable and more collaborative, i think that it's a different kind of a science.  in the autism world, years ago, when i started doing autism research, there were all women in the community that we hung out with, anyway.  we had these centigrams all across the country and they were all lead by women.  and, we were all doing cross-site projects and everybody's working together and we're having a great old time which is very unusual because in mostly different labs would consider themselves to be competitive, but in this world of all women, you know, nobody was competitive.  we were all working together and had a great time.  and then they changed the mechanism and new centers came in and a few of them were led by males and the whole thing fell apart.  the whole collaborative experience dissipated.  so, i think that there are differences in the natural tendencies of certain individuals to be more collaborative, which i think leads to a different kind of science than the competitive ones and i think there is a gender bias towards each of those respectively.  by no means universal because i certainly know some women who are horribly competitive and unpleasant and i also know some very terrific collaborative males. : i personally feel that collaborative science leads to better science.  i believe that competitive science drives one, first of all, to dogmatically adhere to one's own view of things, and that is antithetical to, i think, one of the goals of science because, in science, the truth is out there.  you're a discoverer, not a creator of truth, you're a discoverer of what is real.  so, if you are not collaborative, but competitive, there's a tendency to follow your own theories and to shove down other theories and i think that by nature that makes the science less informed by truth.  where as in the collaborative science, first of all i think that it enhances more integrative science.  science that looks across different modalities, science that looks at different things from different levels of analysis and then also science that considers different ideas and incorporates that, by its nature, is going to lead to more discovery, to... that is more open to new ideas. -interviewer takes phone call- : um, well, i think that's an interesting question because there is a lot of discussion right now of, i mean for example in this question of how you analyze your data and whether you do it specifically according to a predetermined analysis algorithm, how important that is to some to avoid having false positives in one's data i think is a good example of where that rational versus intuitive distinction comes in.  i suppose an entirely rational approach would have you lay out your hypothesis and analysis in advance and publish what you get no matter what you see and i do believe, i agree, that there are problems when you don't see what you want and then you look around and do a lot more analysis and find something that does make sense and try to interpret it.  so obviously, problematic.  but, on the other hand, that purely rational approach assumes that you enter from a state of non-ignorance and i believe that we are ignorant in science and that i'd prefer a more intuitive approach.  you come in with ideas.  you've got some things you want to do.  you explore that and you let the data tell you what's going on.  you develop models around that and then you can go test in further in a way more orderly than perhaps what i just described, but i think that, i mean i equate a purely rational approach as being a narrow one, as being one that's predetermined.  i don't think that good science ever comes from predetermination.  i use as an example the, you know the computational work of the pdp, parallel distributing processing, people coming up with mathematical models for cognition and for a few years there that was so hot.  people were coming up with these mathematical models of cognition and trying to draw conclusions from human cognition based on, what could be, based on their models, and i thought that was the most ridiculous thing i had ever heard of.  i mean, it's perfectly rational perhaps, but, you know, but if you think about it, you can come up with, you know, 20 potential models, 100 potential models, and the fact that some of them, you know, are statistically turn out is meaningless, that doesn't tell you what the truth is, that tells you what the truth may possibly be out of the potentially, you know, endless numbers of potential truths.  so, i tend to - i tend to come up with ideas in weird places and my students come up with ideas in weird places and we throw out weird ideas and think about it and i try to leave things open to what, you know, what the truth is telling us rather than what we are trying to propose on the world.  so, i suppose that's irrational, but it's more fun.   : yeah, well i like the exploratory phase and then the follow up with then, you know, the explored data didn't show up and this may not be true, but we can explore further with more rational analyses. : well, i don't know that i find solutions because i don't think that my work is so much solution oriented.  i don't think that's the nature of my work.  i think most of what i do is discovery oriented, not solution oriented.  but, i would say that i come up with ideas when i'm gardening, showering, or in the middle of the night and almost never during the day when i'm working.  sometimes when i'm listening to someone else speak, i'll come up with ideas and make notes if they're talking about things that i haven't thought of before.  but, for the most part, i have not found that deliberately sitting down and trying to solve a problem is an exercise that is very effective. : gardening, showering, and then in the middle of the night, like i'll wake up... like i'll wake up with an idea.  or in the morning the alarm will ring and i'll sort of be half asleep and i always give myself some time to wake up after my alarm goes off and in that sort of semi-sleep stage, you know, things like that, you know, so our guess is that those are our default flow times, but when i'm not thinking about something is when ideas tend to come to me.   : i mean i think that i personally am much more of the latter type.  not that we don't get a lot of things out.  i think that we do get a lot of things out.  but what i don't tend to do is, i certainly like finish with it, a paper, and it's like done.  i don't say, you know, what's the second follow up study to this.  i just find that to be intensely boring and dull, so... but what i do tend to do is when we get some data, and we try to find data on something that we think is going to be really interesting, but then we look at the data and look at it, pay attention to it, what is it saying?  what does this do?  what does that do?  and just let it fizzle, let it tell itself because i believe the story's there and our job is to discover the story and then find a way of telling it.  so, it's a very different process i think.  it's, you know, i don't know if it relates clearly to generativity.  in a way, it's almost the opposite.  its almost like generativity is out there and i'm just trying to listen to what is out there or the data that are in front of me and let it all out there at once and to let it come into shape to make sense.  what i don't do is to try to do this and this and this and this and this and see what works.  i think i do it in a more global way and let the whole global nature of it sit there.  i mean sometimes, you know, there's too much data and i'm like, look we can't do this all in one paper, we got to do it in three.  let's do this part in one paper and this part in another.  but, i think this is a little different than what you're saying.  i don't think i'm a particularly generative person and certainly sense my head injury, not at all.  i find generation very difficult in fact now.  i'm fortunate to be able to generate words i feel.  i think that i tended to generate fewer ideas that they seemed to come out of nowhere and then, you know, do the studies, then i think i'm more of an interpreter and integrator.  i do more convergent thinking than divergent thinking.  i've never considered myself a creative person.   : well, that's true, yeah. : in truth, i don't believe that i have a conscious process to coming up with ideas.  they do seem to come at me.  i mean, usually they're topical in some way, but i... one of the other things i did early on in my career is i got this crazy idea that the hippocampus is all rolled up and there's functional heterogeneity within it, so let's unfold it and look at it in one solid flat map all at once and see if we can find a special organization that you can't see in two dimensions and i have no idea where that came from.  i mean, i have no idea where that came from.  it just like came to me.  i mean i guess i can look at a couple of things, like someone was doing some cortex flattening in visual cortex, which is a little bit different, it's just like flattening, but that was a big area of brain, it wasn't related to memory function.  but i don't know, anyway, it was a crazy idea. : yes, i did.  yes i did.  and, you know, and then with the a polis, i don’t know that, i mean i've done a number of studies where i've had no reason to think we'd come out positively or interestingly, but i just thought, what the hell and, you know, did it anyways, and stuff came out.  i don't know.  it seems almost random to me.  but what it's not, is it's not deliberate.  i don't sit down and think, "ok, how am i going to solve this problem,".  i never do that.  it's more like, wouldn't it be cool if we could do this and this at the same time.  that i do.  : often, it's just hearing about little tid bits of research in one area and little tid bits of research of another area and little tid bits here and then thinking, well wait a second.  what if we put this and this and this together?  wouldn’t that give us a new model?  i'm doing that right now.  we're putting in our new [name of grant] grant and we have to come up with a new whole theme for the [name of grant] grant, so just trying to think big picture and that's how it usually goes.   : yeah, you know, so you and i have never agreed on the working memory hypothesis and there's a couple of reasons that i have disagreed with that and the major one is some of the most creative people i know have adhd and their working memory is for shit, so... but i do hear what you're saying.  i do think there's a, to me slightly different process, because it's not like holding a bunch of things in working memory and manipulating them, but it's rather putting distant things together simultaneously, so it is in fact holding two things in memory at the same time that... but it's more than that/  it's holding two things in memory at the same time that really oughtn't be there, you know at the same time.  you know, in drawing those connections.  but it's not like a load, if you know what i mean.  it's not like a load of items, it's just hearing this and hearing that and then seeing a connection or trying to see a connection that is not natural in the world, but it's there anyways.  and i'm... i can't say that my working memory is now gone.  it's not very, even despite my incredible strategies because i used to teach pneumonic strategies to head injury patients, it still sucks at least, you know, based on my... compared to my baseline.  if anything, i think that my creative ideas have increased since i lost executive control. : yes exactly.  well, maintenance and manipulation though.  : yeah, to me i consider it more as a convergence and integration function where perhaps maybe some things that might have come and gone stayed around to converge with something else.  but, i don't... i just don't think there are a lot of them, you know what i mean?  it's not just maintenance, although, because i really don't think maintenance has much to do with it.  i think of it more in terms of integration or convergence of desperate ideas that perhaps normally one goes through sequentially, but this is not a sequential process, it's a simultaneous process. : well, um... i think that, i mean i think that we, perhaps, we use the term inhibition in a singular way when there are multiple processes involved in inhibition.  because i think that many individuals are inhibited from generating or just saying new ideas because of the, perhaps an imposed, that's not the word... inhibition... what's the word, you know when you...ummm that's the problem with having word... is it really freaking sucks... uh, don't allow yourself to express new ideas.  i think people censor... censorship is what i'm thinking... that a lot of people censor their ideas and so you never get to the point of generativity because you have this inhibitory process that is more like a psychological process as opposed to i think a neurological process.  and i think that, i mean i think that one of the reasons why individuals with adhd are so creative is because they often lack inhibitory processes so they kind of float in various directions all the time and that allows for generativity one might not have if one was more controlled in not let their thoughts go off in every direction, so that's a different kind of inhibition as well.  but, i would say prior to my injury, for example, most people would have called me pretty... a pretty inhibited person.  maybe i'm wrong about that, but that was, certainly i was more neurotic than i am now.  but i would have never thought of myself as being very generative.  i felt like i had more of a small number of interesting ideas that i went with and i responded a lot to new things that i thought were cool, but i never thought of myself as being very generative.  and i think that inhibitory processes were associated with that.  i am less, um, i am less inhibited now.  i might even say disinhibited now since messing with my head, hence swearing like a pirate, sorry about that.  and i have also noted, in my interactions with students, that although every time they come into the room, they have to reexplain it ot me what they're doing because i forget.  but that once i'm reminded of it, because i work on not recognition memory, my ideas are more free flowing than they ever were before.  i'm less inhibited and i have more ideas.  so, somehow i think that inhibitory control, i don't know if i would think of it as a neuropsychological or psychological process, distorts creativity and inhibits novelty generation.  now, the whole concept do you have to inhibit one thing in order to let new ideas come out, you know, you have to inhibit the dominant so to speak to go to the non-dominant, i don't even know that i buy that model.  at least it doesn't ring true for me.  i think rather natural flow between items regardless of what you've learned and what you haven't is more conducive to generation of novelty and new ideas.  it's not so much that i have to stop thinking of x to start thinking of y, but rather to treat x just like y and z and l and m and not to give it any special characteristic.  and yeah, i think that a lot of people slavishly adhere to the common paradigm and some of the smartest people i know are people who not just rejected the common paradigm but actively, you know, actively rejected it.  i will not go along with that, you know, stupid amyloid theory of alzheimer's disease, like [scientist 2], god rest his soul.  so, you know, yes, so i have mixed feelings about the whole inhibition theory and what it means.   : i believe that, yeah.   : yeah, we'll see. : that's a generation question.  i don't know the answer to that.  ah, let me ponder that for a moment.  i don’t know.  i mean i think that... i think that the combination of being willing to disagree despite... to disagree with, not just become a paradigm, but to disagree with individuals, you know, who may believe that they have a truth that they should express is a critical part to me of my success.  i just don't believe crap... i'm, and maybe this is what it is, that i'm skeptical of everything, you know.  every article that i read, i'm utterly skeptical.  especially if it appears in the popular press or anything that's in news i assume is complete bullshit and anything that i read, i do not believe it.  it takes me a long time to believe stuff.  even stuff that nobody disagrees with.  i didn't believe in the gerstmann syndrome.  i thought it was a stupid accident that was big enough to affect certain areas that were close to each other.  i never ever believed it until i did a direct cortical stimulation mapping of one person and a little tiny area of the brain this big and i created a complete gerstmann syndrome with left it after 5 second of stimulation and i said, "ok, i believe it now," there was something there.  that was, you know, 20 years of neuropsychology later so, you know, maybe that is this natural skepticism makes it possible for one to think of... to doing things differently.   : is that it? : i mean probably my two children i guess that’s kind of a cliché answer but i'm proud of how they’ve turned out and sort of the role i've had. i know lots of people have children think they're great that’s not as unique of a contribution but if you had to sort of put in terms of accomplishment, i guess like academic or career wise scientifically i'm most proud of : okay yeah there's no sort of one discovery or something that i would pinpoint that the focus of my career pride. i mean maybe sort of the if i had to pick sort of one paper that i'm most proud would be one that i published as a post-doc at [university 1] on detecting memories in someone's brains using fmri scans which i think was both sort of an important paper and also got a lot of press and attention and sort of discover magazine which is it was the not that that is the metric that sort of gives you fulfillment that you've achieved something important as a scientist that the sort of coverage bbc news or cnn or whatever. it was the first time a study that i had had that kind of attention so it was kind of exciting. point came at a time i was applying for faculty jobs and i got the job here so it was a good point in my career, but there have been other points and papers in my career. i'll just i know you have a lot of questions so i'll let you go on. : what do you i attribute the success to? actually in both cases i give a lot of credit to sort of the collaborators. i mean in the case of my kids to my wife and their mother sort of working together and learning from her sort of what i can sort of do for the children to help them, realize their potential learn good values and learn new skills and social develop social relationships... on the scientific end i guess i attribute it to certainly a lot of hard work and a lot of trial and error and frustration trying to sort of develop the experiment particularly in this case to develop the analyses the tools that we needed a lot of computer programming and a lot of time sort of examining the data and seeing how it turns out and then figuring out how can we sort of how we can improve it or what would be another interesting thing to look at so once you get to a point you have something what can we do to be sort of more interesting or address a different question. some of that much of it during my part of my career was in collaboration with mentorship and postdoctoral advisor who was influential so i didn’t feel like i did it alone i sort of i had an idea come to me and produce an experiment and then a paper without having lots of feedback and trying to work with them and develop it further. even now when i have my own lab its still everything's a collaborative effort i have ideas that i'll discuss with students that might i'll take in a direction or get ideas from them that i want to pursue and get excited about so yeah i don't attribute a lot of my successes very few things i would attribute entirely to myself and my own hard work in each i give a lot of credit to my parents credit to people around me, friends  : hm... hardest obstacle... i guess for most people it's probably easy something comes right to mind but for me none of the obstacles really seem significant enough to sort of stand on a pedestal um... i know obstacles that i'm still struggling with in terms of obtaining work life balance getting sufficient productivity with the time that i have with my scientific endeavors like projects that we're working on in the lab. my biggest weakness coming is probably knowing how to sort of get closure on some investigation that we've opened up i always want to do one more analysis or see if it works this way or we'll have findings but the story isn't quite satisfactory enough for me. i think one of the struggles and this is something probably throughout my career projects that i worked on in graduate school didn’t end up getting published just never was quite sure that there good enough so my perfectionism and my sort of curiosity and hopefully also some degree of scientific integrity or standards that leave me sort of to not want to wrap a bow around something that doesn't seem like it’s a finished perfect product and i've gotten invites from people to ease back don't let perfect be the enemy of the good that i guess has been an obstacle for me at multiple stages of my scientific career probably more so in life. more broadly i mean with like in college sort of with dating or people i was interested... i would always i don’t know i just i was looking for something to be better and i don’t know why it's been a struggle for me yeah i think it's more of a general phenomenon perfectionism. : i mean i'm not always great at working through it i try to um i been more recently sort of trying to decide that certain things are with scientific papers for example are good enough for that sort of here here's the story we can go with and we're going to leave those other parts out even though we spent a lot of time on them they were interesting but it just didn't quite come together in the way that i wanted so just trying to move papers or projects along trying to summarize where things are at what things need to be done be more goal oriented about the goal of getting out what we've done communicating with the field colleagues and not sort of striving for it to be perfect work that would be noble prize worthy with every project. :  oh no it wasn’t that one, that one was significant but i mean probably the one of the first projects i worked on in graduate school were i was given data from my phd advisor that he and his grad students had collected actually a while back and i was trying to look at it in a new way and then look instead of just uh brain activity differences in different areas of the brain as associated with different parts of tasks trying to look at functional connectivity but we were trying to do this in a way that hadn't been done very much where you look at how regions interact in particular component stages of the tests different cognitive operations within a memory so specifically during the formation of our memory sort of the maintenance of it and the retrieval and so i co-developed working with another colleague in the lab this analysis method that was building upon other work it wasn't like completely out of the blue how we did things we created a tool that people could use to model interaction between regions during distinct sort of successive stages of this multi-stage cognitive tasks and we published a methods paper about it which is probably my most widely cited paper which is probably my most influential since then i published in graduate school a number of papers that use that technique and i've taught at different workshops teaching other people how to use it lots of people who  email me still to this day with like questions about it so i feel like even though it's not something that were a method that we're using a lot right now was very influential to happen in my first sort of year and a half of graduate school and kind of set the in stage process where i became more deeply immersed in analytic methods and i started my post-doc to try to learn new methods completely different from those and try to apply them in ways that hadn't been done before, to adapt sort of existing methods to sort my needs that skill that i developed at that time and at that the i guess just the belief that something that already out there you could change it you create your own method and try to convince people this is a reasonable approach was influential and we still do them in the lab try to seek out new ways to analyze data or to develop new methods. : yeah i would say much of the time its influenced by just working with an existing method and realizing certain limitations i mean in the case of that functional connectivity analysis model that we called the beta series correlation method that was sort of trying to take approaches that people were using for looking at interactions between brain regions within the fmri data to solve some of the problems that were prohibiting that approach being applied to certain of situation of certain metal events that occur in succession different points in time where you're trying to tease those out. in the stuff we're doing now in my lab, um we often use approaches that we see in other people's papers or talks or conferences like trying to reinvent the wheel trying to predominantly to use approaches frameworks for analyzing data that are accepted and that we can cite but then when we want to do something different with it and there's limitation we try to i try to encourage my students try new kinds of ways or come up with different ideas and then see when we present them what do people think of them. so there's a few things in the lab now in that framework where we're just kind of making stuff up for how this analysis scheme works and then testing and then seeing if its producing our results that are good kind of seeing if this might be useful to other labs, other groups. :  i would um, wow that’s a broad question, definitely don’t feel like i've done all the right things even if i could start out again i'd do things a little bit differently i think. i mean i think it's important to try to pick an area of research where you're sufficiently sort of interested and passionate about it really motivates like the things you're trying to find out are things that if you got the answer you're looking for or got a different answer either way be really exciting for you and other people hopefully would be interested in knowing that information as well but at least for you like the inquiry the goals not necessarily i'm going to do this experiment and publish a paper but that you're trying to work on a topic where your discoveries are going to be of value and of good interest because i think it's important to stay motivated and not get burned out and i can't say that’s always been the case like in my career i'm doing a project where i'm super interested and sometimes i'm doing it because i started i figure it out i better finish it by the time its done i'm already excited about the next thing um i think it's probably starting out in the career to realize for like incoming graduate students that even though they might sort of hope that their career path is to become tenure track professor at a university that that's a difficult road and the there many fewer jobs than the number of people phd candidates to just try to encourage them i mean if they want to pursue that really devote everything that they can to being productive, making a name for themselves, getting experience teaching, presenting writing but also if that’s not their only goal explore what else is out there acquire skills that will be useful so even if this doesn’t work out they don't feel felt like 5-10 years of their life were wasted on something that this isn't the necessarily advice directly given to people i'm just thinking people starting out now i feel like if i was starting out now like and then competing against or if i was like on the job market now i could get a faculty position the standards are just risen and people the sort of the top people have risen their cvs are extremely impressive far more than mine was. it's very competitive and so you also i think need resolve that the end goal sort of will be worth it but that there might be a lot of rejection criticism along the way i didn’t realize when i first got into it just how much criticism and rejection you get the rewards are very intermittent every once in a while you get a grant or you get a paper accepted you get selected for some award but most of the time you present your work and people criticize it but what about this what about that or your paper's don't getting accepted excuse me most grants like 85 or 90% of grants get rejected and so for everyone in the field you're sort of trying to sell your ideas and your results and your yeah and sometimes it's going to be appreciated sometimes less appreciated. i think a lot of people can get discouraged from a lot of the failures along the way. : i guess i would that’s a tough one i would probably advise specializing relatively early because if you try as much as i think it’s the wrong advice its more of a practical advice that if you want to pursue this kind of career i mean i'm just kind of talking about sort of academic research being the professor, specializing early will allow you to read up on the literature of that sort of narrow sub field and understand it as completely as you can and learn one set of method and learn them like very well and sort of expertly work within this little niche and carve out your own experimental work and make a name for yourself in this sort of small community of people that recognize if you try to keep your interests very broad like i think that's probably more conducive to interdisciplinary work and having really unique creative discoveries. if you're only working within one framework sort of this is the method i use this is the question i ask, you probably won't even see what's happening in the field and realize that people are doing other areas are very relevant to your draw these analogies i mean what's happening in earth sciences or physics. i mean it could be relevant to brain science even what's happening in brain science language research is relevant to memory research what's happening with eeg analysis that’s useful for fmri analysis. i feel like the right advice the advice that is going to be more useful to the person's creative thinking and just the breadth of their scholarship is to not specialize too early so they still sort of see what's out there but the more practical advice unfortunately is if you wait too long to specialize its harder to sort of more clearly define what it what your thing is everyone wants to know what's your area what's your...yeah contribution and having a nice cleaner set of i did this i found this and i did this and found this its like a story who works together well when you have to give a talk and sort of talk about each of your pieces that you've solved on this linear track. my research hasn’t necessarily been that way i hop around a lot and in my lab now it’s a fairly divers set of projects that we're working on sometimes it's hard to summarize it even succinctly because i've my interests are still broad. :  sorry yeah i kind of danced around that question um i feel like i specialized in some respects i really focused on using one instrument for measuring brain activity fmri and didn’t gain a lot of experience until recently with other approaches. i mean more recently in the lab i've been learning about using transcranial direct current stimulation. i've been doing work with virtual reality environments and doing more testing in that regard through the collaboration with [scientist 1] and [scientist 2] and [scientist 3] and that eeg analysis well not that much i could do it on my own. i specialize with that respect i also specialized in focusing on memory but memory is a broad area in my graduate work i focused on short term memory and in my post doctoral work i focused on long term memory and then i'm doing a little bit of both and even within short and long term memory like their difficult specialties focused on entirely on biographical memory or others who focus on spatial memory and so yeah projects in my lab definitely hop around the landscape of the memory certain cognitive neuroscience of memory disciplines it seems broad to me but for someone else like outside the field its narrow like oh you're focused on memory this technique so sorry, i feel like its kind of a balance like some people are even more specialized than me and some people are less so i'm kind of somewhere in between. : yeah um... the main thing lots of different kinds of research being done into brain function or memory or important. i don’t feel like my area is necessarily more important than some other kinds of research that's happening here at [university 2] and at other places around the world, but i feel like the work that we do is sort of one important parts of using functional brain imaging to understand how different areas of the brain activate and communicate as people are forming and retrieving memories and trying to understand what determines individual differences in people's memory abilities or what happens as people get older and their memories don't sort of work quite as sharply as they used to. these kinds of questions we've been studying as well as focusing on specific brain regions, what is the role of different regions within the hippocampus making decisions about associative memory or as the role of prefrontal cortex. we've specialized certain areas that either have controversies associated with them or some ambiguity in the literature and tried to chip away and make some contributions there to sort of weigh in on different competing views on what one region is doing and i think that’s sort of important enough for people for other scientists in the field are work hopefully will be read and influence their thinking whether or not the studies are done have broadly impacted people's lives or led to new therapies or drugs that can sort of improve people's memories or cognition so far not so much my work has had impact within the sort of scientific discipline that i and the colleagues that are interested in this topic. it's i guess it's translation or broader out location is something that might come about in the future is discoveries that i make influences someone else kind of cascades but not directly trying to do something as important as other scientists are and i'm sort of okay with that. sometimes i feel bad or guilty like that i'm not working on something i'm spending all this time and getting paid this money to do these experiments am i doing my time of the things that are most important for humanity. am i making good use of my limited time on this earth? for the most part i feel like yes even as smallest goals experiments we do on a somewhat isosteric topics like make a contribution and i also teach undergraduates train graduates sometimes i feel like i'll  when i see people in my grandparents or other relatives complaining about their memory problems or suffering from alzheimer's disease like what can i do to help them. the answer well my research is pretty far removed but they're like oh you study memory can you help me and so i feel like even though it's important to try to understand how memory works and that’s the focus of my research and my pursuit. its' yeah its not necessarily as important or as impactful as some other kinds of research or therapeutic interventions that people are working on yeah. i don’t know i answered the question yeah i feel like its important i'd be yeah i don't want to oversell it's importance  : why is it important to me? i guess its important to me for several different reasons like its important if it keeps me interested like if i come to work and sort of excited to um see how the data look on this project and see what we can figure out and when you design an experiment and wait to see if the results worked out as you hypothesize. that’s just one even if i never told anyone else about what we were finding it would still i think its important for me that its getting me interested and engaged for the field though like.. what was your question what was the importance? : but if i just was sort of here they like doing stuff that was only interesting to me like i wonder what would happen in this situation communicating it with people sharing that i feel like i wasn't achieving sort of what i'm sort of setting out to do it's also important to communicate it with people through talks and papers and.. : i initially got interested in cognitive neuroscience when i was i guess i was 17 years old. it was in my sophomore year of college and i was going to this small liberal arts college called [university 3] in [state], small meaning like 350 students in the whole place and there was one professor who happening who offer a new course he was just there as a visiting professor his wife worked in the admissions office. he was retired from [university 4] but he offered this course on cognitive neuroscience and i didn’t really know much about what that was but i watched like pbs specials about the brain i knew like it seemed interesting to study the brain... i hadn't really taken like a psychology class. so i took that class and got really inspired by it just all the different facets of cognition that you could start to use these methods both sort of looking at what happens with patients with brain damage in different areas problems with memory or language or attention or perception and all the different kinds of perception that can be affected losing your ability to recognize faces recognizing musical instruments like how could this be and all that these different parts of the brain are all computing very different kinds of details of ones experiences and it all gets integrated became really interested in consciousness and reading about that a lot actually thought i wanted to go in that direction the philosophy of mind the consciousness maybe with  scientific bend but after that one course i there were no more courses at that school so i asked if i could do an independent study and he supported me and i got a really big it was actually the older edition of this of the new cognitive neuroscience- but it was just called the cognitive neurosciences and would just read like different chapters of it and discuss it with him but i realized i wanted to learn more about it and i couldn’t stay at that school so i transferred to [university 5] which had a cognitive neuroscience major. it was a new major. i was one of the first graduating classes for that major and there i took a lot of classes and psychology department cognitive neuroscience department, computer science, philosophy got a pretty good sort of sampling of the different areas in the field but i ended up deciding to stay at [university 5] for two more years and working in a research lab and that was a lot to study language and that was it wasn’t necessarily the topic that interested me the most and the time but i really liked the professor and had taken a class with her and it was a good opportunity to get more research experience. i got to test patients with aphasia following strokes so i got to see what it was like doing patient work, behavioral testing and then during the second year i got to do neuro imaging learned about that. that was exciting for me and then at that time i decided to apply for graduate school i just i'm not quite sure why memory... well i think it was intrinsically interesting to me but to understand how memory worked more so than the problems that i was investigating with language. i decided i was going to apply to memory labs and uh i yeah from there interest just kind of solidified i had already decided at that point when i was working as a staff research assistant at [university 5] that memory was the topic and the field that interested me the most and the one the most tractable to study. i gave up my idealism about cracking the neuro-core that’s of consciousness, i just i felt like even with this cool stuff being done using neuro imaging to see how consciousness works. it felt like the answers were going to be always out of reach like the deep answers if you wanted to make more progress that goes with a lot of the experimental work happening in memory and particularly what the prefrontal cortex and the parietal cortex were doing and how they were interacting with the hippocampus and i just got really immersed in that field. :  uh definitely yeah i mean there hasn’t been like a period of time where i just took off and said i'm not doing this anymore. some people have periods in their career where they like leave at a side and walk on the pacific crest trail (laugh). i never kind of had that i've taken like short vacations for like a few weeks but i have had times where i wondered i guess i mean times where i questioned what i was doing was important and valuable... the struggle was sort of worth it whether i could be making more money doing something. like i've had times where i've felt dissatisfied, like nothing i do is good enough and its so hard and i work so hard but like i never yeah just times where i felt i guess that were question whether i was doing was good enough or whether it was valuable enough. :  i don’t know maybe one thing i've never really struggled with is going into a state of depression like i manage to not let myself sort of sink into despair like crippling anxiety about the future like am i going to get tenure is this grant going to get accepted there are stresses in mind when things don't work out as well or it seems like such a struggle wishing i had more time like to like relax with the family to occasionally watch a tv show or something which i never do. i just kind of i mean part of it i convince myself maybe there's a light at the end of the tunnel but it's i try to remind myself of the good aspects of it and so one of it is that i'm not many people are getting jobs that they hate i mean just sort of to get through the day whether it's a low paying job you hate or a high paying job you hate you still you're not spending your time doing something interesting like if i was just trading options on like commodities for a hedge fund would that be fulfilling having the millions of dollars would be but i try to remind myself this is a good career that many people would be envious to have so that helps me. another thing is... lost my train of thought... um... i guess that’s it, mostly trying to be appreciative of what i have and how interesting it is and all of the no one's really my boss i get to sort of set my own schedule if i want to take a day off many days i could just do it don't have to tell anyone i wasn’t going to have to be there unless i'm teaching class or had a meeting, but its very flexible and self directed and so that helps drive me. :  yeah i meant there are probably like three main people within sort of my current field like cognitive neuroscience that would be that professor i only interacted with him for a year at [university 3] [mentor 1] it was very influential for me at the time. i do feel like i learned a lot from him both from his class and from the discussions we had. now sort of looking back i don’t remember it that well like the specific it would be hard to for me to tell an anecdote about something he said that really had an impact on me none of the specific conversations even stand out in my memory but it was i was going through a lot of indecision at the time what i wanted to do with my college education my career. i was dabbling in lots of areas interested in international relations, political science, taking classes in that. i was interested in biology and genetics i just didn’t know that, that sort of set me on the course really grateful for him and for that means of inspiration and encouragement and then when i was at [university 5] undergraduate advisor and later my boss in the lab that i worked in the language lab [mentor 2] she was very influential supporter and encouraging and yeah really showed me sort of a lot about what its like to run a lab and supervise and guide the direction of projects and manage the budgets and grants and priorities i just yeah i learned a lot from her and also a lot about how to do data analysis right she also had a lot of integrity about the way she did the science and the skepticism about the data until sort of proved with the right analyses and control conditions like what the effect was real. then later my post doctoral advisor my dissertation advisor was a good guy and helpful in some ways but i don’t credit him in being a major inspiration for me.  :  it’s a combination of their intellect, their patience, and their sort of enthusiasm and encouragement that they each of them made time for me. they challenged me, they seemed interested in my ideas or questions and i guess yeah believed like valued what i was doing in the lab or each ones different it's hard to create an umbrella set of characteristics for all three some of them well yeah in all the cases i think sort of challenged me, motivated me to want to work hard ,and to do my best think about things in a deeper way. :  i would say yes. i mean sometimes it seems like a burden of your time to teaching responsibilities because they expect so much out of your research productivity and so much of our evaluation for promotions is based on research and grants and papers and things like that. of course mentoring grad students and post docs helps get those types of productivity but teaching undergraduates or even graduate students seminar classes is something that i value. its apart of the job and the career that be difficult to do without like that i like seeing their learning process and their enthusiasm as they engage with the material. sometimes i prefer the undergraduates because they're so excited about everything like each thing you teach them they sort of haven't been exposed to it before so you can do these demos and blow their minds in all these different ways. you get this kind of yeah feedback and encouragement from them by the way when you sort of show them some whether it’s a visual illusion or experimental demo or something all the kind of oohs and ahs and the surprise that it worked out this way and they learned about how attention or perception or memory works that’s fulfilling. : not as well as i'd like. i sometimes pick people who are not as capable or hard working or dedicated as i think. i'm trying to get better at that when like picking graduate students or post docs or staff asking them the right questions. i guess i have a hard time like, some people i feel like are obviously on a path to success so like some of the we have many undergraduate research assistants in the lab writing letters of recommendation definitely some of them when i write the i'm recommending them i'm more confident and enthusiastic that they're going to be a great student and do really well phd program or medical school or whatever it is they're going on to they're going to excel in any endeavor because they’ve shown it to me in different ways and sometimes i'm less certain believe that they're on a good track but i can't quite tell where it's going to go. i've taken a few people under my mentorship who had been disappointing and i didn’t necessarily see warning signs at the right stage at the early stage or it might've been other people chosen to work with at that time overlooked so it's not one of my greatest skills to scout for the talent like some people who i've engaged with different stages with in my career who are now like professors or post docs like i'm sort of surprised how capable and talented they are because i didn't realize that like when i was interacting with them way back some people have gone on to do great things and other people have gone to do great things yeah i saw that coming that's not surprising. : i mean some of it it’s the confidence. sometimes i mistake the confidence for success in some people can be really confident but not have much substance to it but the ones who have done well sort of weren't going to let obstacles going to get into their way they were coming into the lab and they wanted to sort of go above and beyond what was expected of them, they weren't afraid to speak up in lab meetings sometimes there can be a hierarchy professor talks the most and the post docs and then the grad students but like if you're an undergrad in the lab and have an idea it better be a great idea or else like you're out of place and time some of these undergrads that i've mentored and seen in labs that i've been in that have gone on to be successful like were the ones who weren't afraid to sort of share with the group what their thoughts were and try to influence a project. but also i mean if they're given an assignment to do they're going to do it not push back in everything and say we should do it differently they’ll of it but then maybe pursue some other angles on it or sort of surprise you with their level of commitment time dedication to that project that makes you want to like give them more responsibility or more creative control over the project.  : um differences in their ability? : no not necessarily, i mean i feel like some of the best people working in the field are women and some of the few graduate applications like often the ones who are the most impressive have done the most, done great recommendations, grades of women. i feel like it’s a field where i mean even i don't know the stats on male female ratio i feel like the women scholars are just as capable and they are among the young faculty successful at getting grants and papers so i'd like to feel that the field is becoming more balanced and equal, but i don't know the stats. i'm sure the struggles that women face along the way i mean when they have children and stuff the responsibilities of childcare even dealing with the pregnancy, i know that impacts their career, the productivity so that their accomplishments these young mothers are even more impressive given like how much harder it is from the to have to work and compete against their male peers who don’t have the same challenges yeah with respect to like child rearing i don’t know yeah that’s a very vague answer but yeah i think very highly of the women in the field and in my lab here at [university 2]. : um that’s a hard one for me because i feel like it's not my strong suit. i've gone to workshops on it. i feel like i could sort of summarize the things that i've been told that one should do i don’t necessarily do them that well. a lot of it has to do with sort of maximizing your productivity during the time that you're at work and trying to be very disciplined like for the next hour i'm going to turn my email off and just do this and so you have clear to do lists and prioritize goals and you get things done and you're aware of deadlines coming up so you're not up against a wall like i have to work all weekend to get this done, i have to stay up all night 'til 3 o clock in the morning to... so if you're disciplined and you don’t let yourself get distracted by email and facebook and the news sports or whatever kinds of things employ people's time. then its not going to be much of a problem you won't feel as guilty carving about out time for something else like today i brought my gym clothes with the goal i would go to the gym which i was always never do which is something i feel like i should do over the holidays i think i gained about five pounds but uh yeah... i always compromise my life part of work life i don't necessarily make sometimes i was working from home a lot during my sabbatical. i thought that it would be nice i could take a walk for half an hour up and down my hill. i did that rarely i and then certainly the things with sort of social life have been limited like i don't necessarily spend a lot of time keeping up with my old friends, like writing to them or calling them friends and like people in the area i don't make enough effort to make plans often like friday comes around it's like oh what are we going to do this weekend so its constraining by things for the kids they have soccer music lessons or this and that or a birthday party to go to. but in terms of like planning a trip oh we're doing a getaway to santa barbara going on vacation or camping or whatever those things that take more time to plan get pushed off. having babysitters so my wife and i can go out on a date that gets yeah, we're having nights where we would just like watch episodes of a tv show or watch a movie its very rare so it's work, kids, household chores yeah that’s what that just doesn’t answer your question just to say that maybe the other people you're interviewing in this project have exceptional work life balance but i don’t think i do. : i think they were influential in a lot of ways my family is very sort of stable and functional like as far as families go like my parents were both supportive and together still married like they grandparents as well everyone was close. everyone prized learning and education and also creating opportunities for me to do other things whether it was special programs or camps or sports things, skiing, tennis, travel and having experiences or going to foreign countries just feeling sort of secure in my family environment so it wasn’t kind of a stressful childhood but also like i did pretty well in school they gave me a lot of feedback and encouragement and were interested in that and were interested in helping me at each juncture where i needed support well i mean like reading my work when i wrote essays getting feedback on it just being interested in school at different stages or the different projects i was working on when i started getting research later on. also helping being a little bit. my mom is a family therapist and my dad's a family doctor. they both sort of helped with physical and mental health type issues throughout my life, there were no specific bad issues, my mom helping me with insecurity when i was going through my like early adolescence even before then trying to deal with issues like um bullying or not that i'd be getting bullied or having trouble sort of connecting with the different peer groups in the school. that kind of encouragement made me feel comfortable socially.  : yeah one sister she's about 4 years younger than me. : yeah i think she is creative. i mean i'd like if you'd ask me to list five adjectives about myself on that in this creativity study i acknowledge some things i do are creative yeah just i don't view myself like as exceptionally creative. that’s probably because i think creativity as more in the arts more visually apparent like what you've constructed unlike anything else and my works seems like stronger foundation than everything else other people else have done before me or alongside me but yeah my sister is also smart and capable and creative. : yeah i mean there are you asking are my parents creative? : to a certain extent they are my dad is really into nature photography so that’s probably his domain of creativity. he does like a lot real close up shots and sees things in flowers or in landscapes or just other oddities around that he kind of zooms in on. he's also colorblind but all his work is color. i think his insensitivity like red and green that we all see so readily like draws out he sees kind of contrast or things even though it's like gray or tannish in its perception look good to him in color looks good in a different way to other people. he's also interested in gardening i mean he doesn’t do creative gardening planting things in a way what's ever done before but it's an expression of sort of artistic aesthetic passion. my mom... i don’t know maybe a little less creative but yeah, i can't think of like of specific instances of creativity but i think she's like fairly open-minded and tries different with her field of psychotherapy, tries different kinds of approaches she's not very rigid in her practice but yeah i don’t know. : they um... i know some people feel like their ideas come like almost from an outside force, like you're sitting there and this melody popped it into your head and you transcribed it and you have this song amazing or you have this idea for your painting or sculpture or building or a theory of how physical matter works or it was outside of like the outside of what you're directly doing just came into your head i feel like i don’t have those kinds of experiences like when i was first sort of studying had to question i know there was a committee that evaluated things and selected me as a participant as having high creativity and i appreciate that, but i don’t feel like i have the kind of creativity with these ideas just rush through me and have to grab a notebook and just like put them down like pull my bike over like motivation. and there are other people who i know personally or respect public people who have a different kind of creativity where they probably have those kind of experiences where those ideas come from deep within some supernatural entry into their brain. i feel like my ideas usually come from either brainstorming like writing on paper, outlines, sketching things out, sometimes i draw little diagrams or write down the things that i know and then try to sometimes i'll close my eyes or pause for a moment to try to see if it comes together but it's often it's sometimes just solve some deep fundamental puzzle of science is usually is trying to see how a series of things go together like what is the story if this is the counterintuitive result we got either, its noise not meaningful or if it is meaningful how should we change update our theories or preconceived notions about this memory mechanism or this brain region. we didn’t expect this pattern. so to answer your question unexpected findings that sort of task of creating a story or revising your framework to accommodate that is one of the times i feel like i need to go into a creative process or sort of spend time sometimes in my office sometimes at home sometimes, when i'm driving i'll just turn off the radio and just try to think through something churn it through my head or when i'm walking across campus. often i don’t let myself have that kind of mental down time but i'm trying to be better about it making sure i do have it i do feel like its important and research recently shows its important to give your mind some wandering time but i usually try to i always like when i'm driving i listen to npr book on tape or a podcast and walk sometimes i'll look at my phone check my emails or check facebook or instagram or like just trying to keep your mind busy at all times. i feel like that probably stifles some of my creativity and is a habit that i've gotten sucked into like becoming more increasingly addicted to devices or to keep my mind stimulated i have so many podcasts. i have so much music i want to listen to and this and that and when i'm doing that my attention is then occupied an object or on something other than my own work and my own creative process so maybe i would even go as far as to say like maybe i'm becoming less creative or less able to tap into the creativity that i once had. i'm worried about that like i want to make sure i don't stifle or that i do give myself time because i want to sort of have new ideas about things and make advances in the field that are non sort of incremental, to come up with a conceptual framework that no one's thought about or write about and i haven't been doing that as much lately where i'm not pushing the boundaries of kind of doing what i need to do each day work wise. responding to emails putting in papers preparing my teaching and stuff i need more time for the sort of creative part.  : sure it's okay. : yeah i'll answer more concisely  : oh, i mean its usually driven by external factors in a way its either so we completed a project but while we were completing it we already started the next thing often the projects chain together. when you're working with like graduate students they usually try to have a series of projects that will become a dissertation. i'm thinking about it with them alongside as often the project has some limitation of your previous project that you try to tackle. sometimes the projects go in new directions... when i say projects are driven by external factors one of the things that came to mind when i said that the funding environment so it's not necessarily the way the best science to get done to pick that thing that will be the most likely to get funded but it is the reality of it. sometimes a given topic. recently, my lab started doing projects that were related to depression. we're not working with depressed patients yet but we're sort of developing frameworks and tasks that will soon be adapted for that and that was due to sort of interest that emerged part of the depression grand challenge initiative here at [univeristy 2] that i got involved with it wasn’t a topic i had intrinsically thought this is what i want to study in my lab but i got interested more about it, by thinking about how my research could apply to that and make a contribution in that domain so that’s like one example where i think the next sort of bit grant i'm going to work on i'm have to do with that that i wouldn't have just sort of three years ago that was going to be the direction. sometimes, i don’t know, sort of what project to do next often with students who i work with my graduate students, like i give them a few different ideas that are broadly interesting to me but i would say i don’t have my like five years of my research ironed out in my mind. some people probably know where they're trying to go. it's just a bunch of work to get there. like we're going to do this. we're going to do this, i'm going to need one person to work on this part, person to work on this part, you just keep finding people and giving them a part of what you're trying to solve and i've been doing this for over five years and i still haven't figured out what is the problem i'm trying to solve. maybe that’s the wrong way to put it, i don’t work that way where there's one thing i'm trying to solve my lab is working on a piece of the puzzle. there's a lot of things that are interesting to me and the projects that we do are things that are a good match between my interests and skills and the mentorship that i can provide with the students' own interests. one student came in and she was really interested in the hippocampus and doing high resolution imaging of sub regions of the hippocampus and that was interesting to me so we did what was different from, no one else's lab was working on that and my lab is working on it now. there are follow ups of that i needed another student to do that how mindfulness affects sort of memory function maybe i'd be willing to support that even though its completely different from what i'm doing now. : um that’s a good question. i mean i feel like both are important. rationality is probably more important. a lot of times things sort of start with intuition sort of a hunch about something but then you need to convert it into a rational approach to get there. yeah i don’t know where i fall on that rationality intuition continuum : i would say like six on average maybe six and a half  : neither early morning or late at night i would say. it takes me a little while to get up and i haven't developed like a practice of like getting up like i need to have coffee first usually and then breakfast but sometimes when i first sit down at the computer, i don’t just open a blank word document and then write i spend time responding to emails or doing this.. i feel like i need a sort of ramp up and then late at night is not ideal like i often like i'm forcing myself to work but i'm kind of like fading out or really frustrated and the quality is going down i would say like the midday part is better particularly the morning maybe from like 9:30 til noon. : um i mean sometimes, the development is in the works for a long time. it's just a matter of ironing out the details where you sort of know what kind of thing you want to do what do you want to do, approach it broadly sometimes i mean at different points in my career i need to come up with different projects ideas where when we're working on a grant or when we're working on job applications, i'm trying to write my future directions. it's a lot of brainstorming. sometimes i make written lists, sometimes i often i try to read articles that i think will be interesting or relating to what i want to do and then just sort of think about them or read them with the hope that a good idea will come to me. yeah. i'm a person that has ideas and they sort of come and go. sometimes i don't write them down and then i regret it and i can't think of it later either idea for some specific analysis or a big idea for a new project but then i don't usually forget the whole thing i forget some critical part of that i'm trying to get better at that. i didn’t use to have to write things down but now i do but yeah i try to often i try to get ideas while i'm reading. sometimes i get ideas in the shower i don’t know  : yeah i mean i would say that happens fairly often which sometimes if it’s a good idea, then i'm fine with it. sometimes i feel bothered like in my off time why am i still thinking that. i can;t disengage from work. i'm supposed to be like i'm with the kids but i'm having some idea that i want to text my grad student about like i feel distracted kind of removed from other things like why can't i just shower or walk without thinking about these things. it’s a hard balance because you want to have ideas but if you're hoping that your ideas come to you when you're not working like then you sort of always working. i mean if you're allowing yourself to think about it some people say the ideas come out of nowhere and that you can't really like you can't set that up. you have to go for the walk and then bring a notebook in your backpack or something.  : um i guess i prefer to work in a team. sorry i'm hesitating because it's kind of a fine line sometimes i feel like in a team there's too much too diffuse the responsibilities and the roles of each person like if no one is leading the effort it's hard to get things done. some of the collaborative projects fizzle not made as much progress because no one's really prioritizing it or there's too many different ideas and it's harder to make decision like oh lets just do it this way. but sometimes when i'm working alone, yeah i wish i had someone else's perspective or want someone else to do it. i mean most of the work i do is collaborative at least one other person like working on a project with a student there's very few things that i just do entirely myself at that level, almost everything i do is collaborative whether it’s a team of two or a team of five, that’s a different story. sometimes having too many people involved has led to less success like a lot of the projects people email threads they have like one person that person needs to respond or else it seems like they're not writing back to you but if you write an email and write two recipients i don't respond or three recipients and no one responds each person has the excuse they thought the other person was going to respond so that happens a lot when i send group emails. it's just the diffusion of responsibility  : um i would say that theoretically it is important but like in practice i'm not that good at having like having the goal in mind respecting the goal. sometimes i change the goal or i'll allow the goal to be too lofty and unreachable, too diffuse that i would benefit from maybe being more goal oriented like the goal in kind of commitment to myself. like i'm going to do this, it could be anything like i'm going to exercise three times a week or go to do mindfulness everyday or i'm going to get this paper published by january 15th or something like having that concrete goal or by being the end of the day i accomplish this or this i tend to be very forgiving of myself or loose with myself imposed deadlines or goals. i don't hold myself accountable as much as i should. i'm trying to turn this into a therapy session (both laugh) but yeah :  this isn't going to be published, right? : but is the entire transcript of everything i say going to be like something that’s going to be sent to everyone? : not special, i mean probably standard methods i do things like i had a written to do list sometimes. i have a digital to do lists. i have a calendar, trying to be better about it. it's not as organized as some people's maybe, even my wife has more discipline she has a system for efficient use of email she triages things and puts them in different folders based on how long it will take to respond to. kind of, if she has an hour of time she gets more done than i would. maybe it's just because she's more disciplined about it what she's trying to accomplish get there whereas i'll do something and then i get distracted. i do something else that’s not necessarily work related just kind hopping back and forth between different things on my list and so my lists don't usually have dates associated unless you have to get this letter of recommendation submitted by this date the date and often just like things to do and prioritization just kind of floating around in my mind which things on this list are more important than others. : my wife has helped me to uh talk through some of the i mean struggles or issues that i had sort of with managing a lab dealing with conflict within the lab and how to resolve that because she has a little more managerial and leadership experience and also organizational skills good work habits that she's been able to discuss with me and coach me on a little bit. she doesn't usually tell me what to do, just kind of i've learned from her. from the kids, i guess i've learned to be like a little bit more efficient or doing what i need to get done because i know that they want me to spend time with them and that if i get my work done i can pick them up from school at a more reasonable time. they're often one of the last ones at their after school program um and do stuff on the weekends but it doesn’t always happen. often my wife and i sort of have to tag team on the weekends one of us can work and the other takes them to a birthday party but yeah in general learn from them about well. so it gives you a purpose i want to succeed and do well at my job to keep my job and sort of provide for the family i don't know motivate me to want to do well, but also to spend time with them have that sort of as an important part of my life so my value self-worth isn't all derived from my work accomplishments. :  oh i mean i guess if i had 18 waking hours i probably spend like maybe like 12 hours in work each day and yeah there's a lot of time getting ready, driving around, and dinner and stuff yeah. i don’t know definitely more than eight hours a day at work. : um, no not necessarily i mean in terms of it is more in line with how i practice my own creativity. the things that i think of as much creative in the arts or in the sciences even are often like more outside the box. my works not quite not that outside the box there are yeah they're scientists who do things that are more creative um but certainly in arts, theater, film and stuff yeah the things that strike me as creative are not there are certainly others that came before them but it's i think of it as like kind of doing something that no one had thought of and in retrospect why didn’t i think of that. : are you talking about as in the creative person that the things that  : oh i do i would endorse that i must of misunderstood the number of things that came before like so many people were so many people were working on like some variant of the theory of relativity before einstein put it all together yeah : um yeah i mean i guess i would say possibly fewer i mean i wish it was more but its at least equal or fewer. :  i would say more time. : yeah its hard to quantify. if you're an artist you make two paintings a month or something. the work is so drawn out even when you have a paper like it's done, it still could be like a long time before its published and many different cycles of revision where you feel like you're wearing a hard hat but you're not actually adding more words to it just changing and changing it yeah. so its not as like linear where you just incrementing and put it out there. i published like several papers a year that depends on the year but like 4 or something in a good year, 4 or 5 but like some of them are i'm more involved in than others yeah in terms of their publication higher quantity and i'm working on that. i'm trying to accelerate the pace of that yeah.. but in terms of like the amount that i write it's hard to put a count on how many words per month or.. : heavily sometimes even after its published i wish i could take it honestly yeah i almost never feel like its good enough which is one of my i guess sort of weaknesses. i always feel like it needs revision. : i don’t know i feel like sometimes i feel like i'm up against either explicit deadline that for grant or something it needs to be submitted on this day. i'm always up against a deadline for whatever it is writing a letter of recommendation like i just its partly procrastination but its partly i just maybe over do it like too many back and forth cycles. i mean not with the letter of recommendation each day and try to re-perfect it that kind of thing i need to get done sitting and be done with it but with papers we decided its done when i feel like i can read it through and be like proud enough of it. if i put my name on it, it wouldn't be embarrassed by it i feel like it was of the standard if someone read it they would hopefully think oh this is interesting and well done and there's no typos and its grammatically correct and the sentences have a nice sort of intelligible structure around.  : i don’t know, i mean it's hard to put words to it. i'm sometimes i'll close my eyes if it's something more visual try to come up with or i'll take a piece of scrap paper, write somethings out that sort of expand my working memory capacity by using external nodes but i mean again when i'm trying to juggle ideas in my mind i usually try to get a distraction free environment like i rarely as much as i love music and having music on when i'm cooking or doing the dishes or driving and when i'm working i can't do it, even music classical music the structure of it is too distracting so yeah so yeah to enhance my capacity working through ideas try to get this distraction. i often with my door closed often faculty will leave the door open and then i feel bad sometimes because maybe it diminishes my accessibility for students, but i just like the sort of quiet i get distracted when people walk past. : um yes, i mean i guess i wouldn't like say that that's my greatest skill, but i do feel like i can connect things together pretty well um… i mean it's something that i wish i was even better at drawing connections it would make me more interested in going to talks outside of my area like if i wanted to sometimes when i go to job talks just trying to evaluate the candidate but like their research and stuff isn't what you're working on so you figure if its not going to be relevant to my projects like you just kind of zone out but yeah sometimes i do draw connections that are useful. sometimes maybe could stand to try a little harder to search for those not trying to search for them being more open finding them so that i don’t want to see my interests keep narrowing those connections when they do emerge are exciting so yeah i find that i do see connection maybe more than average. i still want to be able to do that even more.  : i would say distractible. i mean more distractible now than even i use to be probably a little bit distractible yeah i think i do hop around a lot. : no, i retain information pretty well. : sometimes : i think i'm fairly disinhibited like yeah i sometimes do things that i know i don’t know like tapping whatever it is i'm just not thinking about it but i sort of do that or revert to some old habit that you're trying to break. : no i don’t think i'm that impulsive. i tend to be more deliberative about things. : isn't that the opposite of impulsive i don’t know  : i mean like obsessive compulsive  : oh no i'm probably neither or impulsive or compulsive : maybe i yeah i don't know somewhere on that spectrum yeah i would say yeah. : well i guess i'm a little bit less sort of idealistic and optimistic than i used to be like i tried to find that kind of enthusiasm and excitement and curiosity and to kind of harness it to keep that spark alive sometimes its easier now for me to get jaded and or to be more pessimistic. like sometimes one of the things i have to work on interacting with my students enthusiasm for the like the good accomplishments that they have or the cool parts of their data i tend to be frustrated with the things that didn’t work out like oh that’s good but it would be nice if this effect was significant the story doesn’t so yeah i'm maybe more skeptical a lot of times when i go to talk and read papers like just my reaction intrinsically is sort of critical perspective oh that can't be true, that must be wrong, so not to the point of being curmudgeonly. i don't want to go on that trajectory or just become like a grumpy old scientist yes but that's probably one of the differences. also i don't have as much time as i used to read the literature in a careful way like i collect a lot of papers that are interesting, recently published paper or things that i see and i sort them into folders and stuff but the amount of time that i actually devote to read them like cover to cover even like a thorough skimming is reduced. i feel more backlogged than i used to. : i mean a few different times in my work there's been a big shift in the methods that i've used. when i was at [university 1], i started doing analyses with multi-variant pattern classification it wasn’t a paradigm change for the field so it was already something that others were doing as it applied to my work it was a big influence now almost all of the work i do uses that, so there have been times when i sort of shifted my approach yeah.  : oh... i don’t know i guess i feel like well i used to spend more time doing different things um work related projects that were created or i spend more time writing poems. i was never like that into drawing but like creating things on the computer, different collages, or artwork. i spent a lot of time when i was designing making mixed cds making covers for them, print out onto the cd onto the jacket even like yeah back when we had cassette tapes making mixed tapes and thinking about they way the songs flowed into each other the mood i was trying to create trying to come up with lyrics for songs not like a song that i would not like i'm a songwriter but like parodies for performances at family event that kind of thing where you would change the words and perform it at an anniversary or bar mitzvah family kind of occasion i do some of that now but yeah. i don't know, i guess it influences my creative process that i've tried to instill strive to like be creative in the things that i do i've never been one who likes to go the cvs and pick out the right hallmark card. i usually make my own cards and if you're going for like my hanukkah card to my parents i took a picture of a dreidel and a picture of a menorah i found online and then i used a program to create i used some pictures of the last few years of my family and put them in this folder and used a program to create a mosaic and it was just like an idea i had its not like i had seen it done and then printed it and pasted it on different construction paper. i try to do that kind of stuff and you asked what we haven't talked about so i guess there are other threads of creativity. i'm not much of a musician these days. i used to play the saxophone until i was about 16 but i enjoy i have jimbe drums. i enjoy just trying out different rhythms. my son's been learning piano and sometimes i just play around on the piano to just try to make i mean i'm not trained but try to improvise. : hm. : yeah it's a very. yeah. yeah. : i don't know man. nsf is a tough gig. i shouldn't complain because i have been funded by nsf... : every year since i've been here which hasn't been that long but, man... : my success rate has recently been good i would say. much better than i think what i hear other people talk about but, the amount of work that you do for the amount of money that you get. : that is ratio is not good.  : you know you would be surprised, these areas that it's really difficult to get funding for industry. industry doesn't actually support very much at all.  : partly so, but industry is also, how do i put it, just not aware enough of what to fund and what not to fund. which is interesting. is that obsidian. is this obsidian.   : oh that's right. i didn't actually notice that. so the reason that i thought it was obsidian... : so you know. one of the things that make obsidian really interesting if you fracture it, it will give you a really sharp edge. so there's a lot of native stone tools that are made up of obsidian.   : pretty easily. pretty easily. so. sorry, we do a lot of work on mineral dissolution. so, i don't know what you have had a chance to spy on about me, but i'm not really a civil engineer though i'm in the civil engineering department. i am really a material scientist.  : and my background really is in the thermodynamics in materials. so, there is a lot of work that we do in understanding how things dissolve and precipitate and reactions and solutions so we do work on bone and teeth, i do work on concrete, i do work on glass, i do work on ceramics because they are all functionally the same. you know they are all porous materials.  : and they all inorganic materials in general.  : yeah that's right so that's the big play that i'm making recently. we'll see.  : probably not. : probably not. methane is harder. methane, so what i am interested in, see methane is attractive cause you can use it as a fuel.  : co2 is particularly problematic because there is nothing that we can do with it. so if you think about this, and i hope you will think about this twenty-five years from now. what makes c02 a challenge is the fact that we have no way to beneficially utilize it.  : how much is a plant going to eat, how much are you going to feed them? : there's already a lot of it around.  : the question is how do you absorb the delta that we are admitting which is over and above the carbon budget.  : that's correct.  : well we actually can not plant that many. because if i think we need to re-forest the earth. so that's the reason why we are very interested in this carbonation business. because we can lock up a lot of c02 in building materials. so you essentially reform calcium carbonate... : and use it as a construction material.  : so, that's one of the things i'm sort of fascinated in.  : we'll see. i don't know where it's going to go.  : that's right. more or less.  : that's right and if you think about it, there is a lot of calcium carbonate around.  : that's all calcium carbonate. if it's a shell, if it's a shellfish of some sort.  : all shells of shellfish are all calcium carbonate.  : very slowly. very slowly. that's why the trick we have been up to is figuring out how do we make the process go faster.  : so we can essentially get something to go from not being calcium carbonate to calcium carbonate in about three hours. which is very fast.  : yeah that's right. that's right.  : a snail moving or going either ways.  : no. no. definitely not.  : dsm 5. so what are we up to now, dsm 6? : it's a pretty interesting read.  : yeah sure.  : sure : where is this? can i not read anymore? : oh ok.  : where was this guy from? : no, where was he originally from?  : you should know that.  : i'm sure it's eastern europe but it sounds. dr. bilder –hungary. : czech, hungary. hungary? :  so are you a doctor? : ok. md phd or are you a phd? : oh good. ok. so you are like a fake doctor too? : right. : oh i see, so you are clinically trained to prescribe.  : so you can prescribe.  : can you? : ok.  : correct. : wow. : i'm sure, well then there only should be narcissists.  : wow. wow. : oh that's good.   : i'll tell my wife i met someone from an elite club today. : (laughter) don't rub it in. i feel bad enough already.  : you know like i keep saying right if i wanted, if i thought i was doing this for money this would be a really bad idea. : really bad idea.  : you know at least at your side of campus with your comp plan it's a little bit better. : we don't have a comp plan. : that really sucks. : so keeping in mind the success rate of inventions...  : i don't think it matters. i would rather take the comp plan.  : i would rather take the comp plan. : you know what, you're probably right. i'm reasonably sure that probably is spot on. but but you know, like i say, i think i really took this job, i'm not really good with dealing with authority. and i was offered nice positions in industry. you know i was very young at the time. lots of people keep giving me grief about this. but i got my phd pretty early, i was 26. rather, i was appointed to this position when i was 26. which is quite early.      : and i thought about going to [country 1] to work for [organization 1] to run their chemical and mixers group. it was quite nice, you know i would have a team around the world. but you report to the corporate vp and i didn't want to live in [country 1]. i chose to be an engineer because i didn't want to learn a foreign language. and i lived in [region 1] already, so i ended up writing a post doc in [country 2] and i thought it might be in [country 2] and you know [region 1] is xenophobic, it's extremely language sensitive and you know what the money is great but you are too much of a social outcast. and it has nothing to do with the color of your skin. which is what makes it worse. and i say you know what nah, and i thought about going back to the [country 3] and i said you know what am i going to move to the [country 3] and do and i said well, this professor gig doesn't sound too bad. so let's give it a whirl. so here we are. : you know you're right. you're right, but you end up being a slave to yourself because and you know neither of those are particularly good situations because i had a fundamental misunderstanding of the job. i didn't realize how much pressure is placed on really raising money to run a successful and impactful program.   : so you're really you're a research manager in the guise of a professor. because i don't do any research. i don't do any of the things i'm supposedly good at or trained for. i improvise on the fly.  : and that's really the truth behind it.  : that's right. because so you know you guys run much bigger teams and that's cool but i have twenty people that i need to take care of.  : and there is no way, there is just no way that you actually manage to do a decent job of mentoring people with that span. i think you know, when i first moved here i use to have three people that worked with me. and that was perfect. we worked at really high productivity. i could spend lots of individual time with everyone  : and you know some of those people are still with me. and you see the difference what good mentoring and time commitment to mentoring does.  : because everyone gets smart at one point in time, the question is how fast and i think that with the right mentoring, you speed up the process.   : so. short answer yes. but here is what i'll say. i think i'm incredibly ambitious. i think i would have managed with or without it. i think where i got it and what i'm particularly thankful for is a guy that i worked with didn't particularly spend a lot of time with me but he taught me the process of how to think. that's actually more valuable than spending time explaining things to people i think. ok. i think it really depends on the individual because some people you can point them to fire and they still will manage to burn themselves. there is some people you can point them to fire and they will pour water on it.  so it really depends on the individual. but i think i was incredibly lucky because i worked with an incredibly narcissistic, really difficult individual. but the guy was brilliant. and i thought that was fantastic because you know i wasn't there to make friends. i didn't care about the work environment. i still don't care about the work environment. because i think it's all a means to an end. i wanted to get as smart as i could, as fast as i could, as thoroughly as i could. and this guy fit the bill perfectly. so i loved it.   : a little bit cold hearted perhaps but it was ok. it was efficient. : so. i'm not sure i know how to think either, but... so my typical take on it  -and so of course i needed to do a lot of proposal development - i think what i'm really good at, i say this pretty often, i don't think i'm the best scientist. i think i'm a pretty mediocre scientist. i think what i'm good at is really seeing the big picture and making connections between disparate ideas. i think that's what i'm good at and i think i would go so far to say that i think i'm the best there is of the people i've seen. i'm only a mediocre scientist though and i appreciate this because of all of us have our strengths and weaknesses and i think my weakness is really being able to connect the dots... rather my strength is being able to connect the dots. i think my weakness is i don't think i'm a good scientist, but what i've come to realize is you can find people who are really good scientists very easily and they are happy to work with you because they can't see the big picture and they're not able to connect the dots. : and i think that's what we've been really good at. so you know the group that i run over in civil engineering is full of physicists, chemists, real scientists, mechanical engineers, basically crystallographer, geologists whatever you wish.   : because my take on it is, these are all things i don't know. so let's hail people into it and i think that makes for good teams : because you know when people know different things they tend to listen to each other. : because there is no inherent sense of competitiveness that is innate. it arises over time but it's interpersonal rather than... i'm going to say knowledge based. and that's my take on how research teams should operate. so we work with the people in the dental school and i keep telling them i know more about your materials than you know. you just know how to make them grow. oh you just know how to fix them.  : but we actually understand them. so you know when we develop therapeutics for like decalcification for example. we actually understand why we do it in a particular way. see i don't understand the fda's take on it. but if you want to determine how to least demineralize a tooth... : i understand a couple of things i understand how you can measure it, i understand how you can mock the efficacy and efficiency of treatments and how to develop a better treatment and i think it's very nice you know because i'm sort of suspicious about western medicine and medicine in general because i think it's a bit of an empirical science. i think it's based on realized data sets, i think it's based on observation and pattern recognition and i'm not convinced that it is... i would say theoretically robust.   : that's right. that's right. unlike engineered materials which are typically much better behaved.   : oh! wait! he was [individual 1]'s advisor.  : you're the fellow right.  : yeah [individual 1] fellow right.  : (laughter) : that's funny. : right.  : right. right.  : exactly. how bad could it be.  : sure.  : no favorites. prosperity will tell. i think my views are too myopic at this stage.  : so not going to judge.  : the diversity of work that we do.  : that's, you know i would not single out a single topic. i would really say, i think what sets us apart from any other program in the country that does what we do, is the fact that i span a really wide expanse in what we worked on. i think that's actually, i would give that more credit than i would anything else.  : connecting the dots.  : i think i think i'm really good at understanding structure property relations in materials. i think that’s what i'm good at. i understand how simple concepts translate into something more significant.  : so i don't know if that's helpful.  : i think so, you know, so here's my take on it. so i think i may be doing a disservice to myself, i think it's really, it's really the truth. you know so i say this very often. you know so i say this very often but i think what makes a good scientist is someone with a really solid education going up to high school and the first two years of a bachelor's degree in engineering. i'm speaking of engineering only. i think if you understand basic concepts and math, chemistry and physics, i think that's all you need. i don't think you need much more. i think the more you learn, the more specialized you get and i think the more myopic you get. i think i stopped learning when i was in the second year of college and i think that's a good thing. because in some ways i tend to over simplify concepts but you know my take on this is pretty simple. if you can't explain a really complex concept into simple words, you don't know what you're talking about. so i like, i like being a sophomore in college.   : hopefully i'll remain one for a long, long time.  : but i think that's really a reality. i think if you got really strong fundamentals, in physics, chemistry and math. you don't need much more. you know it's a bit of a stretch, but my argument is as follows. if you go back a hundred years from where we are, ok. essentially all the new developments in physics, chemistry, really came about leading up to the 1950, 1960's.   : starting about in the late 1800's. so let's start with ron genner as a starting point.  : if you go from x rays, all these guys were tackling these concepts with basic, basic background. but a very robust background in chemistry, the natural sciences and math.  : and they went on to develop really complex concepts.  : stats are a really solid foundational basis and i think that's all you really need. because i think that provides plasticity to your mind. i think the more you over-specialize, the more resistant you become to doing different things. that's my take on it.   : it would be completely against our educational basis i will tell you that.   : a lot. i read. a lot. every day.  : no favorites, i read everything.  : i know a little bit about the guy but that's not the type of thing i would typically tend to read. i'm very interested in the history of science.  : i'm very interested in the history of things from understanding things like the cosmic microwave background.  : not really.  : that's basically a cosmic microwave background, that's a radiation that's present still from the big bang.  : it was discovered in a lab back in the sixties or so. but the guy who actually discovered it won a nobel for it. but you can use information from the cmb to tell you for example what's the average temperature for the universe. find out it's about 2 kelvin ok. so i'm very interested in trying to understand things that provide plasticity to my mind, but help me understand how to work on new concepts. how to appreciate new concepts. you know it's about you want, i want to be careful... i'm pretty young, i presume i will do something not along these lines, but what i do in my office for a long time and i think you need to understand how to reinvent yourself and provide plasticity to think about new ideas.                                                                                        : it's not easy, i think i think the hardest part of this job and i think that really makes a difference between where i would say successful professors and average professors. right, of course we're dealing with generally smart people but there is degrees of freedom in this. it’s people who have the plasticity to apply basic concepts across a wide span of areas and domains and i think an important thing for this is i think you need to train your mind because of course there is some of us that are more creative than others. but i think if the mind is not trained, it tends to atrophy. so i think it's important to keep it, i don't want to call it virile, but it's really virile.  : so you know i was in grad school i was often criticized for having the shiny object syndrome. i have a shiny object syndrome. big time. i think it's my biggest strength. i think it's really good i didn't let them beat it out of me. and you know i think it goes back to this idea - this is what i mean by virile - i think your mind has to find new things that it wants to do and is interested. if you realize you don't have that, i think you are in a whole lot of trouble. because i think this innate curiosity, i'm going to say childish curiosity, my wife always accuses me of being 12. might be right. i think it's really important. maybe from a creativity perspective, partially, but i think it's really important from an ambition perspective because i think curiosity drives ambition and vice versa. you want to learn, you want to know why. it has to do about want. i think the mind responds well to wants. because you know it's not a reproductive need. it's not like, excuse me, i want to fuck, but satiating the mind is very hard. i think it's very hard and i think the reason that people are not successful in being creative is because they don't understand how to satiate their own mind.  : i think i want to find what it is that the mind wants.  : see i wasn't sure. but if you say that that's good.  : because i tend to get bored very easily.   : mhm. : mhm. : i think that's only partially true. because and the reason i say that is, very often to get to higher hanging fruit you need first order verification, first order understandings. you have to go off the low hanging fruit.  : i think the idea of making the leap without satisfaction of i'm going to say fundamental checkpoints... : is impossible. right? : so i think you have to go, the question is how much time do you dwell on the low hanging fruit. i think that's really the key. i think first orders are better than the rest, figure out that we have enough to proceed to the next step. i think that really makes the difference of people who get hung up on their details and the people who move forward. i train the group. i'm very proud of this. to do the very best they can. to do 70% of the job and 30% of the time.  : i say don't go to a 100. you don't need to go to a 100. because the moment you go to a 100, you first of all will not succeed. the other thing is you will spend a career on it.  : i said leave the dregs for someone else.  : there is enough people to satisfy these tertiary conditions.  : and i'm not being an ass when i say this right. i think this is really this business of plasticity. because you spend too much time your creativity diminishes exponentially.   : the mind bores.  : personally, i think it's beyond the 50% mark.  : no 70 is where we stop. that's a hard stop. right? : that's cessation. but i think it's really at 70 because what happens i believe is you start slow. you do an exponential uptake right? : i think the exponent goes into a decreasing trajectory right. so it doesn't go linear quite yet. but it starts to taper off.  : and then i think at about 70 it stops growing exponentially. : so at 70, it's a hard cut and then you go exponentially again. i think the half life is about three months.  : this is a lot of my... so a lot of this is empirical observation, but i think this is pretty good metrics. that's why i never let a student work on something for more than 18 months at a time.  : 18 months. hard stop.  : you have to move on. because yeah i think an important part of what we do and i think what we should be doing is training people to have diversity in how they apply their minds. i think the idea for a phd and the way a lot of professors approach it is bizarre. i mean select one topic and work on it for four five years. : yeah. : you know i don't think that's true though. have you come across a typical graduate student?  : you think they can learn on their own? i think that's a dream. : as a percentage, you're looking at maybe 1% : you know i am really, really, really, questioning about all of this because we supposedly at the top in schools and i would say most of our students are mediocre at best. man, out of the 17 that i have right now there are two who are brilliant. one is so smart he doesn't know what to do with himself. so he's his own worst enemy.  : but the other guy is just pure brilliant. so if i was to compare myself to one of these guys, same stage in career, same exposure etc., i think from an intellectual perspective of being a scientist i think i was only 30% as good. maximum. optimistic, 30% as good. on the other hand, i've got others and i don't say this in a poor way, i know 15 year olds who would be better than this particular individual. so you get essentially the whole span.                     : but there is a reason why it's biased much more to the left of the mean than to the right of the mean. i think a large part of it, this has to do with training. but you know i really do believe, you should correct me if i'm wrong, i really do think, probably a controversial statement, i think you're smart of your not. i don't think you can actually train anything into it.  : ok.  : only 50% : wow.  : it's a lot less than i would of figured. yeah that's difficult, it's difficult to make the statistical argument either way then. because you're always half right.  : cannot prove for, cannot prove against.  : yeah but you see i think that's a problematic issue with science in general. i don't think it's about trying to prove out own hypotheses. i think it's working towards a correct or appropriate hypothesis.  : i think subjectivity is dangerous.  : people do experiments to validate their own hypothesis.  : i think it's interesting that you say that.  : yeah. : i think i'm phenomenally, phenomenally good at retention. phenomenally good.  : again. i don't have a lot of points of reference but i think i have potentially the best recall of anyone else i have been able to observe long enough. : i don't know how to measure recall. ok. i'm sure you guys know how to measure recall right.  : yeah. oh wait. : i was put in the mri, i don't know what that. : i think i've got near perfect recall in fact.  : observationally. i'm probably going to do really poorly on your tests. but i think this is something that has hugely benefited me. hugely. much more than being a good scientist. i think understanding simple concepts and keeping them in my mind has helped me more than anything else.  : you know as a kid, i use to remember phone numbers right. and i could tell you anybody's phone number. man. i needed to dial it once. this has wore off over time and i blame my smart phone for it. actually. that's a disease by the way. it's actually really bad for the mind. you know i lived in [country 4] and we didn't have smart phones back in those days. we had these rotary dial phones : and we had phones like that. but you know i wasn't smart enough or interested enough to know how to use the memory in the phone.  : because mind was better i think. i think cold recall has been the biggest weapon in my arsenal.  : has been the best weapon in my arsenal no question. i think this is really where conceptual understanding becomes valuable. because i think if you understand a concept and retain it, that's a winning combination. because i think that's really where connecting the dots becomes possible. i think connecting the dots is really very strongly associated with good recall. because you understand disparate things that are, i don't want to say folded away, but folded away but able to recall instantaneously. and i think that really helps.  : really? : i would be shocked if this was not true. i would be shocked.  : and you know what i think is also, you know i train people also right so i observe. i think what i have been really good at, you know i have been always looking for a student who is better than i am. i am always looking for a post doc who is better than i am. i have not had that luck with post docs, but with students i have. i am always interested in how to metricate people. ok because i believe there is a clear intellectual gradient in life. nobody is equal. i just don't believe in the concept. and this is universal and this is how to differentiate people on intellect. i think when i look at myself and i told you about these two individuals who i think are really good, what i notice about people that i think are really smart is the ability to work on sixteen different things and prioritize them equally with the same level of recall, attention to detail, and delivery.  see there is a lot of people you can find that can do two things at a time right, but most people can work on two at the same time right. i don't find that impressive. do that with about twenty things i'm impressed. i'm very demanding, but maybe that is self-evident. i'm very demanding of myself and i sort of impose the same standards on everyone. and i didn't grow up in the west so maybe this has something to do with it, but i don't believe in patting everyone on the back. i think you have to really see that there is a significant difference because you know the way thermodynamics works, things go from higher to lower. right. they never go from lower to higher.  : that's right you provide a higher state. people that can will achieve. people that cannot never will anyways.  : but if you never program a higher state, nothing to look forward to. i think human beings respond really well to incentive.  : see you're not trying to diminish, you are just trying to provide a higher point of reference.   : so my father raised me really well. you know so mom and dad were really good parents. i'm, i'm eternally grateful to my mother for making me a decent human being.  : i'm eternally grateful to my father for instilling a work ethic into me. so my father ran a really large corporation for a long time. did very well for himself. and he always told me, by the end of my life i am likely to leave you and your sister enough money that you never will need to work ever again. he says but here is what i want you to keep in mind, he says most likely that money is never going to be enough because if you don't develop the right habits and value system, you can rid all of your money pretty quickly. so he says here's what i want you to keep in mind. yes you can go and have a career and whatever else. even if you decide to become a barber, i want you to be the worlds best. and you know what when i was eight, i thought what's he talking about? right. as i got older that really started to settle in. and i got a sort of interesting background. i actually failed out of college. came back to college, and i was too bored, i was very interested in women. i was a freshman in college, should be no surprise.  : you know i don't think i, i was good, i was good ok, but i don't think i was the world's best.  : probably for the best because i might have stayed in it. but he gave me one of these (word) talks.  he said you know what, here's how it's going to work. he says get your act together because here is two options. you're going to go the [country 3], get yourself straightened out and go make something for yourself, or you are going to work for your mother and wash dishes for the rest of your life. my dad is the kind of guy, there is no such thing as an idol threat. ok. you will wash dishes for the rest of your life. and i said well you know i liked wrinkled skin like getting into a tub but not with washing dishes, so this school thing might have to work out.  : but father was very very good very good, at explaining and elucidating that ambition, and desire, and want and success of very important things. i feel it comes organically. and my father is very much the tough love character, very much the tough love character, and you know what, i loved it.     : i think if i had a milder parent, it would have been a problem. i think something about strong minded personalities.  : i think you need direction, you need to be challenged. children need to be forced. i believe in that very strongly. because they don't know any better.  : we've got a baby on the way. : five months.  : yeah. wow. very much looking forward. no fourth months. not even five anymore.  : we got a little baby girl on the way.  : june. : june. june. : you know, i don't believe anybody is prepared to raise a child. i think instinct kicks in, i think values come later. that's my take on it. i might be wrong. i'll tell you in twenty years.  : i don't know. i don't know.  : yeah. : time.  : and being demanding. i think being demanding is critically important.  : and the reason i say that is i think you have to provide a higher point of reference. i think you have to keep telling people this is not good enough, try harder.  : because the moment you say, you've done well enough, that's it, you lost someone. because the thing is, the mind sort of satisfies itself. and if you try and do it again, and say oh this is not good enough anymore, i think mind gets confused. and i think the problem is emotions plays into this. people are not good at dissociating emotion. and i see this especially in the west. i don't get it. but i think people are very feely, for lack of a better word. and you know, i might be wrong, because maybe people are very feely in india for example, but maybe they don't show it. i'm a pretty cold fish. but i think that's a strength. because i think emotion, maybe maybe it does cloud judgement right, but emotion prevents the mind from working towards full potential.   : i could be dead wrong. i don't know but i think that's the case.  : really, wow that's interesting.  : ok. : really? : wow. : i would never believe that actually.  : but doesn't emotion contaminate the mind? : really? that's shocking. : yeah but i think that's great. : yeah but i think that expression involved. i think there is expression, i don't know. but, i am not convinced. maybe there is expression in engineering too.  : is that a gun case? : nuh huh. my mother tried very hard. i'm impervious to it.  : tone deaf and impervious and not interested. : regret it now but no interest in learning it.  : maybe if i'm older. : really? : no i want to drop dead at work. i want to drop dead at work. that's what i want to do.  : work till i die. that'll be great. : no. but you know i think that's a good way to go. because it means you had purpose all the way to the end.  : because you know so i made tenure sometime a go and i had a couple of my colleagues tell me you should slow down now. you've been going at a pretty ridiculous pace.  : because i think we published 20 papers last year.  : 20 general papers, which is pretty good. and i was told you know this is crazy you are going to burn out. and i said this to my wife and she said you know what i don't care. whatever you do just don't stay at home because i don't know what you would do with yourself. and you know, what she is perfectly right. i don't know what i would do with myself. i have no hobbies. there is nothing that really interests me. i really like to work.  : perfect.  : no. exactly. that's my take on it. let me do what i'm good at.  : really? huh. : really? wow that's good.  : i like it.  : i think i'm very much the generation type then. i don't like being patient. incubation doesn't work. do you really think professors are really a good set of subjects to be using in this study?  : can you fly people in from around the country? : really? your, for this study? : well i shouldn't have got selected at all.  : such as? : how do you decide that? that's all subjective. : right. : does art have any utility? : what's your definition of utility? : oh.  : utility has a fake meaning.  : utility has a fake meaning.  : utility means to use.  : so what do you think you're going to be known for in posterity?  : yeah. you. : i think that's probably right.  : i think that's about right.  : what's next? besides kids, what's number two on the list? : what's number three? : what's number three? : are you elected into the n.a.s? : on your way? : why? : what is iom? : oh. iom.  : are you in the iom? : are you on your way into the iom? : why? : this is a pretty abstract topic. pretty hard to study i would think.  : no? : yeah. : really why?  : this is so much harder i would think.  : i have a question for you, do you know what the fibbonacci sequences are?  : yeah. pretty hard.  : apparently fibbonacci sequences and fibbonacci patterns rise up in a lot of places.  : does it arise in the mind? that's what i was going to ask you. : yeah. that'd be good. : hey i got a question for you. do you know what explosive percolation is?  : i think this is something that you should look into. : so think about a couple of totally disconnected nodes. ok? i believe thought is about explosive percolation. i think creativity is driven by explosive percolation. i think there are critical points. and the idea of creative percolation is you got disconnected nodes in a net network which might be locally connected  : explosive percolation occurs when the nodes in a point of singularity are connected.  : and i really do believe explosive percolation explains how the mind works.  : explosive percolation is very nice because you can model it mathematically. it describes a lot of critical phenomena in nature. it describes a lot of critical phenomena in material science.  : you should look at explosive percolation. it's an interesting gig. and you know.    : yeah. so you know. : i don't know that one.  : but you know i guess in some ways you could look at explosive percolation from a neural network point of view.  : but i think it's a lot more than that because there is a lot of probability which drives explosive percolation phenomena. it's about achieving criticality that's in local and global connectivity.  : and i think that's really, when i said that this business about recall, i think good ideas come from explosive percolation.  : because i'm perfect... this is study of oneself. ok? so i can only speak with some confidence for myself. any good idea i've had, it festers for a while. it starts. so think about germination so to speak. not incubation. totally different. i think it starts, it sits, it sits, it sits, you get a critical event and it all connects.  : i'm very fascinated by explosive percolation. i really want to write a research proposal on explosive percolation. i just don't think i've thought of anything fundable yet.  : hm. : i'm really interested in explosive percolation. : have a look at it. it's really interesting. really interesting. people have explored explosive percolation for all kinds of things. determining trends in the market, determining critical phenomena for example looking for terrorist attacks, looking for connectivity in nodes etc. looking at how wifi is propagated. it's all driven by explosive percolation.      : very interesting business.   : well that's good. i hope this was slightly useful to you then.  : besides boring you to death.  : i have a question for you.  : i'm really curious about the functional mri. did you have a chance to look at my functional mri? : last week. i'm very interested to know : sure. : i don't know. i don't know. : yeah. : sure. : i'm very curious, you know the reason i actually signed up for this, is i'm curious to know how my brain works.  : that's actually the single biggest thing of interest because i'm very interested in the mind.  : and you know i don't know how to quite, how to put this but... i'm interested in understanding how to stimulate the mind.  : you know, i think my legacy will be students and post docs. how do you take someone from average to great? curious. curious.  : i did some mri work when i was in grad school. for different reasons. i wasn't doing what you were doing. i was looking at what moves into porous objects. looking at diporal axations.  : tell me more. : how do you figure out diffusion?  : is it absolute or is it relative to something else?  : to what? : oh ok so it is related to water. alright. : yeah so i know. so we do something like this with porous media as well. we use it as diporal axation ties to get diffusion nots.  : but they are basically bench marked to diffusion constants  : of pure water in a medium where there is no constraint to it's movement. : is that what it is? : right.  : do you see that in in more creative or smarter people there is higher connectivity? : but don't you get significant averaging of the signal? : millimeter. : not too bad i guess.  : bundles.  : no. : no no i haven't. : so how are people who use macs different than people who use pcs? oh wow that looks nice. : that's really slick.  : that's pretty slick.  : maybe i'm the weakest part of the herd that is going to get eaten first. : that would be fun. : nope! : oh my gosh … probably being open to different ideas. i think of my track record as speaks to that, i have dabbled in a wide variety of things, my education was varied, so i am proud of having an open mind, i think.  : umm, certainly my upbringing exposed me to quite a bit. i don't know if you want me to go into detail there, but i would be happy … : i have an explanation for why i think i'm more sensitive to having an open mind than all the other people that i have met, you know? : um, my mother, i think i mentioned to you, was born in [town 1], [country 1], and confined to a concentration camp, where her mother and brother died. so she was an orphan early, came to the states, met my father, who was getting his phd as a scientist... i grew up in a household where it was noticeable that my mother had been exposed to some very horrible and horrific things in her life. : but my father, being an academic, had a lot of books and other sort of things in the household, so ideas whether on the religious front or the scientific front, kind of were always in my background. so i was exposed to a lot of different ideas, different sentiments and emotions, certainly those having to do with my mother. : it also turned out which, and i know that this is all confidential, but mental illness runs in my family in pretty deep way... i have a number of siblings and family members who have been either committed to institutions that are medicated, so exposed to a wide variety of emotions and ideas forced me to think about what's going on in life. my education was is a result of trying to work through some of this. as a graduate student, i would say, especially in the philosophy department, while i was also a graduate a student in a scientific department : which i would not recommend ….  : anybody, as proud as i am of really trying to reconcile a wide variety of ideas, it was a shitload of work. : but, i was able to get an advanced degree in the humanities and ultimately my phd in the sciences. so i've tried to reconcile the humanities with the sciences, and that had to do with trying to come to some understanding of what i was exposed to, you know … : and what life is about. so, i have been a life-long learner is the way i describe it, and having an open mind about things i think was definitely shaped by those kind of formative experiences as i was growing up. and then, as i started to feel up opportunities, for people both professionally and personally. : well certainly the hardest thing to overcome was trying reconcile all these things, because i still am working through it. and so to think about some of the grander questions, like, "why are we on this planet?" "how do we deal with people who have different perspectives?" "how do we deal with people that are handicapped, emotionally and mentally?" where you are forced to think about these kinds of questions from a very visceral angle. i still haven't come to any conclusions, i haven't worked anything out… so that should be argument enough!! : difficult problem! : but i am sure, of all the people you have interviewed, you are probably going to find no one for an explanation about what’s going on, why we are here, and what the broader purpose is... of anything if there is a broader purpose. : it's pretty basic. i read a lot, i take things in, i kind of think about stuff, dwell on things more than what some of my friends would like...but you know, and i think again keep an open mind so the way to tolerate things is to just not be very dogmatic … i mean, i certainly have opinions, and i would argue would be better than others... : especially in this state of nation of the united states, it is very important to have an open mind! : yeah. : umm.... the direction of my career.... so i chose kind of genetics and things in many ways because it is the study of diversity. if you think about it, genetics being fundamental in evolution and what not. and explanation for why there is the diversity that there is. so you can kind of argue that that interest is consistent. with the all the things that i have been exposed to. there is a diversity of things me to pick and choose from, that is ways going about one's life and perspectives, etc. so i studied... chose a career path that is not rooted in any one of those things necessarily, but really about the study of diversity and why such diversity exists. at least from a biological perspective. : twofold. one, obviously if there were more hours in the day, and i would do more. : but the real reason is that i needed to feed myself. there has to be some kind of practical orientation, and all that, to things. so, then you may ask, why didn’t you stick with the humanities, why did i go into the sciences? well, i have children. i had mouths to feed. and i could make a living, pursuing the science, scientific things. so there were very kind of practical issues surrounding, motivating me to choose at least, the profession i did.  : umm, that's a good... my father was a quantitative scientist, and i do mostly quantitative science in things. and that was a real influence, no question. the ability to exploit kind of a self-discipline i think i got from my mother, who was able to persevere things. um i think those are two overarching reasons for choosing the very specific career path that i have in quantitative kind of biomedical science or quantitative sciences. um but you know i also just nurtured an interest in this over the years. some of it having to do with practicalities, making dollars, and then learning about things and being stimulated by the problems. you know i don't mind working with students because it's all about the exchange of ideas and kind of imparting knowledge to people so it's a good vehicle for kind of venting some of my own personal frustrations with what's going on in the world.  : i think it's absolutely essential to have an open mind but be self-disciplined and this is the point- many people are disciplined, but they require kind of an external force to impose that discipline and that's fine. so many people choose a career path, maybe working within a company, where things are kind of defined and there's expectations, and those are often imposed on them. so if you're working in a company, you're told "this is what you need to do" and people thrive in that kind of an environment. with respect to what i do, it requires a great deal of self-discipline. so on saturday mornings, you have a choice. you can get up and read nature articles to find out what's going on, or you could go to a coffee shop and chat with people- i mean it's all about choices. but at least with respect to being an academia, or being a researcher or a scientist, especially one interested in diversity, there... the discipline has to be self-imposed. so i would argue you know to be successful in at least what i'm doing you not only have to have the appropriate motivation right, you have to value what's going on, but you have to be appropriately self-disciplined. : yeah, that's a great question. i mean i again think that what's most important is for one to be a life-long learner. to you know really appreciate the vast expanse of ideas that are out there that one could kind of look into if their interest was peaked or that they might be forced to look into because it’s a counter argument to whatever they're thinking about at the time. and the degree to which you could share your opinions or ideas with other people would enhance kind of your social network and what not and broaden your social network, but sometimes that's not necessary. i mean sometimes, like i said, at least from my perspective it might... in order to really understand what it is that you're interested in understanding, you might just have to you know lock yourself in your office (laughing) for a couple of days and read and not necessarily overtly shun the outside world, but understand that you have to put in the time and energy. so a real balance has to be struck between kind of being a loner let's say and exchanging ideas. i think it's bad when people adopt one or the other approaches, they're either constantly in the midst of other people you know, exchanging ideas, but not really refining their own, which were self discipline, but equally as bad is people who kind of shut themselves off and just read, read, read and turn out to be the nerdy pocket protector types who- because that clearly won't enhance the exchange of ideas and allow one to kind of bounce ideas off other people to see if there are some obvious criticisms of those ideas that would force one to rethink what they're doing. so a balance has to be struck- have i figured out the proper balance? no way! i appreciate there needs to be a balance. : why is it important to get involved? well again i think you know there's no better time than now to kind of appreciate this. there are many differences of opinion of a wide variety of topics, right, a great diversity out there, and i think to avoid an absolute disaster, whether that is you know becoming more factious in the way people go about their lives and forming groups, i think its just important to have an open mind. now in the context of my specific profession, kind of quantitative biomedical sciences and what not, i'm very interested in kind of enhancing the way people are taken care of in biomedical or clinical space, for example. and that again has a lot to do with my upbringing where i lived in the midst of people who clearly needed care and uh the question is how to optimize that. so, it's very important to have the appropriate orientation, no question. : well, a little of both. i mean i think everyone could ask themselves at some point in their life you know- are they doing things that are really satisfying them you know from some deep seeded disappoint- this just makes sense. and in doing that, you might realize that there's different routes you can go down and one that may turn out to benefit other people might be the best way for people to go. um so if you have 15 things to choose from and you were going to choose them randomly, "i'll go down this path or this path," you might weight them more by the degree to which they might impact other people. uh and then if you ask "well why would you do that?", i would ask the opposite question- why wouldn't you do that?  : yeah i think trying to have a sense of personal accomplishment, um but also uh understand that you know there's something to be said for altruism, right so i don't think i'm being selfish in pursuing what i'm doing, even though i lead a good life. i think you know i am at least- i at least have the illusion that what i'm doing might benefit others. so i can kind of see two birds from one hand- satisfying my own kind of selfish interests but at the same time maybe benefit other people. and that's again the balance that i think many people need to strike. : oh, absolutely. you know i, even this morning i was on a call with someone and i basically asked them "what the hell am i doing? is this a waste of time or not?" so i mean every waking moment i think, at least for me, i find myself you know questioning what might come out of, what i'm doing and whether this is a-an appropriate course of action to take given my interest and what i want to accomplish. so i think that questioning is a daily occurrence with me.  : absolutely. now some i follow through on because i feel it's a personal obligation even though i came to the conclusion that in the grand scheme of things this is not the route i want to go by. you know i wake up in the morning and say "hey i'm scheduled to teach a class " and then say "i don't think this class is worth it in the grand scheme of things so i'm not going" i mean i'm not that bad, but certainly questioning things in a larger, on a larger scale and that's a daily occurrence for me.  : um i'm sorry could you repeat... : oh i think many, many people- i don't know that there's been one person in particular. i've had the luxury i think, the real pleasure of having worked with or listened to you know many people who have been inspiring but i don't think there's been any one person that i can point to and say "ah hah! i heard this lecture here or i met this person on the street here and that changed my life." no it's been more of kind of an accumulation of interactions and what not that have more or less reinforced kind of some interest in thoughts i've had about keeping an open mind and um kind of immersing myself in aspects of the world that i find intriguing and important to consider. : yeah i think there are people that are certainly more articulate and coherent in putting their views forward and there's something to be said for that. i mean if you know you can't communicate an idea and obviously you're never going to get appropriate feedback or never reach people. so certainly people who have kind of exhibited a clarity in thinking and articulating their opinion i believe that is crucial for all the right reasons. you know no one is going to understand what the hell you’ve got to say if you're making no sense, so you know that is a trait i think that you know i have recognized the value having been exposed to different ideas and that goes back to my days in the humanities as much as it is reflecting my attitudes now when i'm giving a talk or chatting with students or whatever.  : um yeah absolutely, i mean i think often in those sorts of relationships where you got kind of teacher/mentor, it's kind of making the assumption that the teacher is kind of a know it all that you have this fragile eggshell mind and often times that's not quite the case. i have to say i've learned as much from my interactions with students as they may have learned from me. so that kind of master-slave, mentor-mentee thing is important because obviously some people are more experienced than others and they can expose the novice to you know the ways and means of whatever they're involved in. but often times you know the assumption that somehow there's a body of knowledge that the mentor has and it's got to impose upon this mind you know, there's reason to question that. like well why would anyone buy into the ideas of this old man – why should i believe that he has this- you know in certain countries if you're talking about building a bridge and there are certain principles that need to be upheld in order to make a safe bridge, then you've got to follow them. but if it's in the humanities where it's lets say ideas that could be critiqued, or if it's more research where the ideas could be critiqued then i think it behooves the student to go into those kind of mentor mentee relationships with an open mind saying "look this is someone who i respect who has you know a lot of experience who's maybe published things that i find compelling, but i'm going to have to go in there understanding that there might be flaws to their thinking" so that the mentee mentor relationship should be more about nurturing a critical acumen in the mentee rather than you know just pumping their brain full of facts that have been accumulated. so the best thing a teacher could do is try to develop a critical capacity in the students, an ability to think clearly for themselves and that is overlooked i think in a lot of modern education where at least in some context it's more about spoon feeding ideas that should just stick in the trainee's brain rather than equipping them with the ability to think critically for themselves. : well i think for me what i try to do is say "keep in mind what i'm about to tell you is maybe something that is open to criticism" so not be so dogmatic in the delivery. i think that's crucially important because at least in the scientific realm, you know there are many ideas that have been thrown out there, new technology, new ways of going about things that are flawed at some level. so those flaws would have to be acknowledged or exposed and in that way you'd be engaging the trainees in an exercise that tried to figure out how to improve things, not necessarily parting to them some kind of rock solid fact that they need to bury deep in their minds and never forget. : um yeah, i think so. i think it has more to do with again motivation and discipline and you know attention to details and things of that sort. ability to think critically and you know those kind of come with the territory. i mean as you know, academia as i was saying earlier, there's a lot of self discipline involved rather than imposed discipline like you know "you need to this, you need to do that, you need to wake up at 8, you need to be at work at 9" you know all these kind of- with academia it's more about self discipline you know, doing things because you're genuinely interested and if that's not there you're not going to make it. : i think, you know when i first started out, yes. now i think that distinction is blurring. you know back in the day there may have been kind of an unwritten kind of social norms and things that maybe divided men and women a little bit. i think those distinctions are blurring there's not question, so i would say currently less differences between men and women than maybe at one time. as you know, the number of females that are staying in science or staying in the humanities is growing and i think for all the right and positive reasons. so you know those maybe historical divisions that still exist in say the middle east or something like that are dissolving in kind of western societies. and certainly within my own profession and things.  : yeah great question. um you know again for me i don't see a huge distinction i mean obviously i don't share with the world what's going on in my personal life, but there's a blending there. again it has more to do with the nature of the work. so again, if you're working at a bank and that bank is open from 9-5 then you know when 5 rolls around you go home and you do things with your family and your kids which is legitimate and should be encouraged. but you know in academia as a researcher i could go home and take my work with me and say saturday morning as i'm getting up and doing this stuff and then maybe on a thursday afternoon when there's kind of a lull in activity or i've gone a little brain dead, i'll come home and spend time with people. i think with academics there's less of a division between personal and private and i think that is consistent with the fact that you know your mind doesn't turn off at 5 o'clock right. : well maybe in some sense, but not to a great degree. i think i've been able to certainly go with the flow when that has been called for, but i've been pretty independent in my thinking and making decisions that you know i believe in rather than you know other people might believe in that wanted me to go in a certain direction. i think, yeah, that's i think safe for better or for worse. : no i think in retrospect, my upbringing was unique but at the time i was living through it i of course didn’t know that. so for example given my mother's situation you know she kind of just had a different perspective on life so when i was growing up, we had very much kind of an open door policy in our house. it wasn't like i lived in a commune, but we had a string of people live in the house with my brothers and sisters and i. so 3 of my brother's wives, my brother's current wife lived in the house (laughing) that i was growing up in. and it's not like this was just a house full of all sorts of debauchery and stuff, it was you know a controlled environment but it was certainly mischievous and crazy behavior and that i probably will regret and so will my brothers. but i had other people live in the house, you know one of my favorite stories is i came home from college one time unannounced, you know i was 18, coming home from college, i had a free weekend and hitched a ride or did something to get back to my house just to hangout with my brothers and what not. i'm from a big family, i have 5 brothers and 1 sister and came back and the key to get in the house that is normally stored in the garage was not there so i had to knock on the front door and this person appeared at the front door in a bathrobe and i had no idea who it was and i basically said "hey i just want to get in i'm a little tired" and the guy was like "why would i let you in the house," "well you know this happens to be my house-" this was no one i had met and then he kind of looked at me and said "oh you must be one of the brothers" and i said "yep" and he goes "oh i'm ['s housemate 1] i'm living here" and i was like okay great, fine one of my brothers and my mother must have made this arrangement to have this guy live in the house like i said this was not unusual, so i then walked into the house and immediately started to go down stairs to the basement where my room was and he goes "well where are you going" and i said "man i'm just really tired i want to go downstairs you know i had a long ride" and walked downstairs got to the bottom of the stairs then knew immediately why he was asking why i was going down there because all my stuff was put in a corner and he had sort of occupied my room. i wasn't upset by it- i'm not using the room. why wouldn't he use it? so you know that's kind of the environment i grew up- there was a lot of love in my house. my mother would never do this to diss me and throw me out it was just her attitude was "why would i care if that room is unoccupied why wouldn't you want to help somebody out." so that was the motivation more than you know good riddance i've gotten grid of my unruly son or something. so that's the kind of environment i grew up in and i think having an open mind like that is important and that kind of generosity let's say i learned from my parents and i am very grateful for that. : oh everything you know i was involved in a great deal, i was an athlete when i was younger but i still read things. so i had kind of the... and i was younger so... as you know when you're younger cliques form. you have the sports guys, you have the nerd guys, you have the you know disco dancer guys, and you have the play boys whatever it is you have different groups that kind of form when you're in high school and i never really identified with any one group so you know i would hangout with the burnouts at lunch but  then go play football in the afternoon, i didn't really want to have some kind of identity that i would feel compelled to kind of uphold no matter what the circumstances. so that was clearly the case when i was growing up. it created a lot of confusion, it created a lot of friction, but you know that's how- i spent my time in a wide variety of activities, let's put it that way.  : uh, yeah to some degree i think i'm the only academic in the family but my brothers and sister you know are in different professions. i have one brother who is a contractor so more a blue collar. i have three brothers that are bankers including two that actually own and run a bank and that are very successful in that field. my sister is a lawyer who is actually the associate director of the [institute 1] in [state 1]. so my family, you got very broad kind of professions and very close in many ways. in fact, they all live in [state 1] where i grew up. i'm the only who's kind of migrated outside that area. so i go back obviously on occasion but they're all within 15, 20 miles of each other and i'm you know 1000 miles.  : um very much so. i mean i had my kids early you know i was young when i had my children. that created financial difficulties and sort of work personal life balance issues of the type we were talking about, but i'm very close with my kids. they're all now in their 30s and very successful. i have grandkids, so you know there are certainly frustrations with every family. you know my kids all managed to get themselves into a little bit of trouble from time to time whether that was financial or legal or whatever (laughing) but the typical maybe not so typical challenges- i mean i've had some things go on with my kids that are probably are not what other people have experienced, but i'm very close to my kids. in fact, that i'm picking up my grandkids today at 3 and having them for the weekend, so grandpa is going to be busy. : good question, i... i think i'm a reader, so i like to read. so you know from things that i've read, lectures that i've heard, whether that's in a public forum at the local university auditorium or on tv. yeah, i kind of enjoy synthesizing things and thinking about things. so all over, all over i think. moments of inspiration, you know the muse, whatever you want to call it, i've had those sorts of experiences. so i think all over, all over.  : yeah great question. well, some of it again is sadly kind of dictated by the demands of the job. if i'm scheduled to teach, then i've got to make my lecture. if i you know got a grant to do something, then i'm going to have to do whatever was outlined in the grant. some of it just comes form a sense of responsibility, given my obligations in my profession, but i certainly now more than ever am trying to only take on projects that are really going to be appealing for long periods of time. that is definitely true. so, i'm trying to think of things that would make sense for me to pursue given my interests and experiences and kind of knowledge base, but again not all of that is kind of what motivates some of the actions i take. some of it has a clear sense of responsibility - i signed a contract to do "x", so i'm going to do it.  : only in the context of kind of resources and things. you know, there's plenty that i would like to do, but i just can't afford to do. or it would require an infrastructure that is not set up yet. so again even this morning i was on the phone talking about putting together a big project, set of projects in europe and the question is it a- where does the money come from and b- where is all this stuff going to be developed and housed, you know infrastructure things. and 3... c, who are the people that you bring to the table to round things out, you know so many things i'd like to pursue require a whole lot of thought about resources, no question. and sometimes that will make or break an activity obviously, there's no way in hell we can pull the end of the resources, then that project is not going anywhere. now in terms of less expensive and less resource intensive projects, i just dream those up just sitting around the desk or in conversation with people, like what if we write a paper on this where the need of putting the paper together might not be so demanding. maybe it's just about ideas or some math or something where we could do that as long as we want to expend the time and energy. : oh boy, that's a great question actually. i think there there's absolutely a balance like i said, sometimes you know ideas come that haven't necessarily been the product of you know, kind of a way of thinking involving syllogisms or something this- to that-to that –to that ahh hah! and then we arrive here- i mean there's some of that but a lot of it is like you say intuition or trying to approach things from am creative angle. one of the things that i have benefitted from in my own career is kind of borrowing things from different disciplines. so in doing quantitative science in kind of the biomedical field, there's no reason why the math or the analysis methods that are used in the financial world can't be adapted in say applications in the biomedical sciences. so i have read the econometrics literature to gain insight into models that might be appropriate to carry over into the biomedical sciences. so you know i believe in kind of the interdisciplinary field of the sciences, especially the quantitative sciences where the boundaries about what is only useful for this discipline versus that discipline are really blurred right?  : sure, yeah yeah. so um like i said in at least certain context or examples involving analysis methods, you know trying to mine things from data or what not. um you know i have drawn things in other disciplines. you know one in particular there's, in ecology there's a way of analyzing data that's used routinely and when i read about this or heard about it, i got interested in it and thought, you know this is absolutely perfect for this thing that i'm doing in analyzing single cell gene expression data, tumors, or whatever it is. so i think for me, a lot of satisfaction is in finding connections between things or ways of leveraging ideas in one academic discipline in another. and i think that's very healthy and it in fact the future of a lot of science particularly in the quantitative space.  : uh yeah i don't know if i can put my finger on exactly what the trigger point is but absolutely... you know sitting around scratching my head and thinking "i'll never figure this out" or "man this is boring" or whatever it is and then suddenly some idea, kinda crops up. you know i don't think that i'm being touched by god or something ridiculous like that, but you know it could just be an accumulation of knowledge that was you know buried in a few neurons that weren't just firing at the time and suddenly (laughing), so i don't want to sound like there's some real mystery here with respect to you know how those thoughts actually came into my head, but certainly i've had moments - and i'm sure other people have as well - where you know i'm stuck on something and then you know some moment later there's an ah-hah moment. i have certainly had those, no doubt.  : oh i have a major like sleep issue. so i, my sleep is very broken. i've always had this, since i was young. i've never really been treated for it because it seems to have been manageable but yeah i wake up in the middle of the night all the time, drives my girlfriends or then ex-wife at the time crazy but it's just the way it is, um so yeah i don't think my sleep patterns are normal by any stretch of the imagination. i mean i know they're not. : um either, you know i don't mind getting up early. i usually get up early and hit the gym and do stuff and then come back and you know feel energized to get stuff done. but like i said waking up in the middle of the night, i can choose to lay in bed and stare at the ceiling for 2 hours or i can just get up and read something, and i usually opt for the latter, so it might work well. :  absolutely, i walk around now with my ipad. you know at times pieces of paper i mean if you were – i think you were here one time in my little unit, but i have post-it notes and pads of paper with ripples and things i put down with ideas. so i do tend to record whether in writing or have an ipad, or even with my iphone, you know the little phone thing, i have ideas that came to me at the time so you know, when i have more time i can kind of flesh them out. so i do a fair bit of that kind of stuff.  : it depends, i mean i've been fortunate to publish quite a bit. i think i hit the 500 publication mark a little while ago, but you know a lot of it is collaborations where the pace of the publication is not dictated by me exclusively but through coauthors or students having to put things together. um, uh, but no, i don't think i just rush to publish. i like to think that you know people should be a little more careful and want to scrutinize what they're going to put into the public domain before they just throw it out there. so no, i don't have like a blog or a website where you know every idea i have i put up there or tweet, tweet out. and no i'm not a big believer in that. i think it makes sense to – if you kind of take a step back and think about things before putting them out there and that's not only to safeguard against you know some obvious criticism that was overlooked because it was put together in such a panicked or hurried state, but also making sure that what's out there you know is legitimate right and something you actually believe in right? so less concern about whether other people are going to find this objectionable but more concerned about whether you actually want this to represent you and your ideas. so taking a step back and saying " you know do i really believe in this?" and i think that's important and that's why i'm not so anxious to just throw everything out there that might pop into my head. : uhh yeah, i think maybe overarching goals are always in the background, whether, but some of the stuff there might be an immediate goal. i have to put a progress report in for my grads so i'm spending a week you know putting things down on paper to fulfill that goal. i think every profession and certainly academics have these sorts have more immediate goals but you know broader goals kind of guide a lot of what i'm doing, so now as we may have chatted about earlier in our conversation or in our previous conversation, i'm very interested in kind of translational science. the discoveries that are made actually will see the light of day, should they deserve to see the light of day and in terms of their clinical utility and what not and so that's an overarching theme and you know that helped guide you know maybe some of the stuff i want to publish or some of the stuff i want to put into a talk. is this really going to lead to something that people might benefit from? so, yeah those kind of overall goals for at least my professional side are definitely guideposts for what i'm trying to put together professionally, no question.  : um no i think i'm fairly spontaneous. i mean i've had like i said episodes where i'm driving up to [city 1] to have a conversation with somebody and on the way there i've been thinking about something so i whip out my iphone and dictate the idea so it's there for me to go back to. now that's pretty much how i do things. i mean i do spend a lot of time like i said reading things where it's not just spurts of ideas, it's more long, protracted periods of time you know scrutinizing something like you know a journal article or a book i do a lot of that. and that also affords the opportunity to write things in the margins of the articles (laughing), underline things, so there's a balance between kind of long focused periods of time where i'm looking at something versus having thoughts that i think are worth keeping, let's say because they're relevant to something or because they might be a new way of going about things. so you know, it's a balance.  : no i have other activities. so i do believe that it's important to have a balance. i... like i said before, i think the people who kind of bury themselves in their office and are like a hermit you know with a single light bulb over- that... this would never work for me. i mean i like music, so you know i play the guitar. i like being active, so you know i stay in shape and participate in that stuff. you know i think all that kind of balance with the more creative artistic side with kind of the more visceral, i like to get the blood flowing through my body side along with long protracted sessions at my computer or reading a book or something. i have all of that and i think that balance is healthy for me and all kind of keeps me at the top of my game let's say, the top of my game.  : i'd say i'm constantly full of ideas, many of which are probably not worth a damn so i don't know that i go through periods where i've got like nothing to say. and in fact, my joke is you know, that i say when it comes to a good idea, i'm full of it (laughing) because that term full of it kind of you- you know so that's my, i like the joke about that but i'm... no i've never gone through protracted periods where you know i've had like nothing to think about or feel particularly strapped for ideas. no mostly like i said i've got notes that go way back to things that i'm thinking "someday i'll get back to those" so i have a stock pile of things that you know i think might be worth pursuing or revisiting. you know again whether these are going to amount to anything is an open question but certainly have that stock pile. : great question. i mean on a balance, it's probably 50-50. 8 hours here- but it's just it could be that 8 hours is broken into 1 hour chunks separated by one hour where i'm doing something else or something like that. so i don’t again lock- put myself in a desk from 9-5 and then do all this other stuff. and i can afford to do that given the nature of my work. as an academic, i've got my grants, i've got some other things and i have to make my own schedule and that's why i said in order for someone to kind of buy into this lifestyle let's say or want to get into this, it's more about self-discipline. i mean i have nobody who's coming to me saying you need to be at your desk from 9-5 or you need to work on this now. i have to make those decisions and for many people the temptations to not do that might be too great, or they kind of getting lost in procrastination right could take over. so you know, if because i'm motivated by what i'm doing, i don't see it as a burden to do these things but as a result i can do them when the irons are hot, right and i, yeah. : yeah aspects of it. i mean a lot of in biomedical science that i'm doing and it's very, certainly now, very technology oriented you know with the introduction to dna sequencing and proteomics, and wireless devices, new imaging you know protocols and all this. i mean there's a wealth of kind of technologies and what not that someone like me could try to figure out how to exploit in certain ways. so there's certainly a generation thing. with personalized medicine for example- a field that i'm interested in, there's lots of themes that could be used to figure out what is unique about an individual that might make one think that they could benefit form this treatment strategy or this intervention or prevention strategy or whatever. the question is how do you actually put it together to enable that personalized medicine. so actually building off the very plentiful ideas and technologies and assays whatever it might be that are out there. yeah i think this is a good time to be in the biomedical sciences because of that explosion of technologies that are improving day to day. but again what it behooves the translational biomedical scientist to do is figure out how to take advantage of them and integrate them. so yeah there's truth to this idea, no question.  : oh i don't think you're ever done you know again, i am a life-long learner i. the minute that i publish something and scratch my head and say " you know we could've done this". i don't think it's ever going to be done. i think sadly, or maybe not so sadly, maybe this is something we should celebrate you know the questions are just too deep and too complicated to think that we've settled something we can kind of pat ourselves on the back and then forget about it. that's rarely happened in my life time where there has been a true solution quote unquote to things, we're getting closer to you know reaching kind of optimum in the way we say and deal with patients, but we are far from there right now. that means there's plenty of room for improvement.  : well a lot for the reasons i just described i mean when i go back and look at some of the stuff i published early i just cringer and think "oh my gosh!" maybe at the time that was a good idea but in retrospect, or there was a tiny mistake or something like that i mean everyone finds this in their work so... no i don't spend, i don't agonize over this and punish myself for this. i just think this is part of the evolution of ideas and improvement this is what science is all about. again i don't think that there's the one magic idea that's going to stop everyone from thinking about things. i think there will be a need to improve things going forward for at least you know as long as i'm going to be alive, i just don't see someone coming up with the singularity like moment where everything is exposed and revealed and then we can all breathe a sigh of relief and say "ah! we don't have to get up in the morning," yeah.  : i think i produce more. i have quantitatively, again we can worry about quality. there's no doubt. i know what my h-index is and all that kind of stuff. so i know where i sit relative to people so it must mean that i am being more productive than many people. not as productive as certain people. i'm not claiming that i'm the most productive person but i think on average, yeah, i probably produced more. that may have something to do with my work habits, or my knowledge base that i draw on, or what an idiot i am for spending as much time as i am on the trivial things. you know, whatever it is, there is no question that, at least quantitatively, that the numbers suggest that i've produced more than the typical person out there. again, that doesn't mean these things are worth a damn! like i said, i believe that things that can be improved that i've contributed to.  : more or less... umm i think a little of both. like i said, i think for some of the things that i published you know, we go back and think that maybe we should have done x, y, and z. and maybe that's been pointed out by colleagues, or peer reviewers, or whatever. but other things i think i beat to death before publishing. so i don’t think you know i'm on one side or the other with too little or too much. i think there is a balance in the amount of time that i've spent in any project or over my career.  : no, i think for me... i think am just curious by nature. so i am a little bit fickle intellectually in that i like bouncing around from thing to thing. and i think that might be reflected in my work. if you look at my publications, i haven't just published in the neuropsych field or the cancer field or the quantitative science field as i am kind of spread out through all of that stuff and that reflects kind of a broad set of interests. i think that is another reason why i don't actually associate with different societies. no, i am not the president of the american society of human genetics, or the biometric society, or the american statistical association. you know, i believe in all those societies, but i am not so focused in any one thing to say that this is how i'm going to spend my entire life doing x and nothing but x. where you know all my credentials and all my affiliations are rooted, that's not for me. so, you know, i have given talks... i am giving a talk about artificial intelligence to the [scientific society 1] of the united states. : and just last week i gave a talk to the [scientific society 2] and the fda, i am a little bit all over the place, not unlike others though scientists whose work is kind of multidisciplinary. certainly, if one was to look at my cv and my career, one might notice that and quite frankly, that could have been a detriment to my career. certainly in academia, where the reward system, the departmental tenure review process, is really focused on whether someone has made a contribution to the field that they identify with. right? but you are up for review. how many publications do you have in neuroscience journal? well, you know what if you are in the neuroscience department and you collaborate with people from the cancer center? then your name is on... you know. how is the review committee supposed to judge that? they don't now the impact of the work and how well it's regarded and all this kind of nonsense.  : i tend to just say to hell with that. : and maybe that has created issues. but, you know, i am a tenured professor and all that so i must have done something right. the fact of the matter is that i tend to assure, or ignore that sort of stuff because i a... i couldn't live like that professionally in one little corner in the scientific universe. and b, i actually think it is not healthy scientifically. i think that the interdisciplinary stuff is crucial! but i recognize that it's not for everyone from the reasons we've talked about for the last 45 minutes.  : an open mind! : i think that, you know, many people just wouldn't spend their time reading economic journals! or certainly not things in the humanities! : they're focused on dna sequencing. but i can't help myself. i enjoy that kind of thing. like i said, i don't like being stuck in any particular scientific canyon and feel like i have to crawl out of there. i don’t like that intellectual confinement. it doesn't suit me. so, i just decided why not try to exploit it at some level. and the degree that which i had success doing this is an open question. all i know is that that's my perspective, yeah. : both. i can certainly put the blinders on if need be. especially if there are external pressures that i feel i should really operate under because of a sense of responsibility. plus, if i am interested in something, then i can definitely put the blinders on and do that. but by and large, you know, when things crop up that peak my curiosity, i have no qualms going down these and some of them lead to blind alleys, like i said. yeah. : yeah, i think that it is safe to say that you know, and i don't know how i did on these thought tests that we did, but probably from interactions with people, and from kind of recognizing stuff, i think my memory is pretty good. i retain a lot of stuff. you know, i can recall things, you know meetings, and what not pretty well. again i don’t know if this came out of any formal tests i did but at least that's the feeling i have and people have commented on like how good my memory can be for particular details. : yes, certainly! i think because i spend so much time kind of in the book world but also in other worlds. you know, people can notice that maybe, you know, i've been a little bit absent minded, but not to a high degree. i you know don't forget to put my pants on in the morning, this kind of nonsense. i don't suffer from that. i think it just tends more to do with, you know, going through periods of time where i am focused. so, for example, i'm really bad with like birthdays and things you don't talk about... in my memory, i may have blind spots in my memory for certain things, but i'm not real great with that so what i tell people is that every day should be a birthday. every day we should treat people as well as we do on their birthday. but, you know, i'm not real good with that and some people equate that with kind of an absent-mindedness. i think that it's just the opposite. it's more like what i say. i don't really attach kind of special treatments to certain days. certainly, there are rituals and ways of celebrating things that commemorate things that i believe in, but by and large... like with respect to the birthdays, like what i said, i'd like every day to be a positive day for people.  : i'd say both. i feel that in many respects i am uninhibited, you know, i don't mind bringing up points that others might find objectionable, but i also have learned from experience that you should pick your battles. : and you know maybe curb some of those things. and like i said before, many people, certainly our president, rush to tweet whatever (mastipatory?) idea comes into their brains, you know, and i think that is to the detriment of everybody. so, you know [artist 1]'s work, i think got some surface ideas and got some stuff underneath and it might make sense to think twice about just blurting stuff out there. i think that's true. i see that as consistent with, you know, my own profession in kind of research ideas like i said. i have no problem with challenging the status quo, but i don't know that i would just get out there, pick up a megaphone, and say whatever comes to my mind and challenge the authorities or whatever i'm.... i'm too shrewd and experienced to recognize that that approach can come back to haunt one. and you wouldn't be able to put into effect what you want to put into effect. an idea, a way of going about things, a way of approaching a problem. whatever it is, so it makes sense to take a step back at times.  : umm... do people say that i am impulsive...umm....no, no, i don't think so. i think you know i am... i think i come across as being a little bit more frugal than some people, but that again might just be a function of how much time i can spend doing other sorts of thing. you know, i make a good living doing what i am doing, but you know... and i have good place – you've seen it – i've got a nice ocean... : but i don't live in a mansion. i live in efficiency. i happen to be on the ocean because that's all i really need, so you know impulsive in terms of doing things for the moment, spending sprees, no i don't think people would characterize me as being that way, but i don't think people would characterize me as the opposite, being real anal and, you know, never doing things and overly analyzing things... i don't think that is the case either.   : yeah. no, i mean i had mentioned that in my family, you know ocd is one of the kind of clinical manifestation... i don't know that i suffer from that, though other people would argue that that is the case, you know. i certainly don't feel it anyways. so, no, i don't think that i am... at either extreme.  : have a what? : no, no... no i don't... no. no, i think i am active, there is no question. i'm active, i do a lot of things, but it's motivated by interest. i don’t think i'm just a ball of energy and nerves and other sorts of things and easily distracted. no, i can sit for long periods of time and do things. even though my grandkids spend a lot of time with the fidget spinners, i don't. hahaha. you know...   : well, i think that, no we kind of touched on everything. for me, i think that my upbringing, my exposure to different things, my kind of self-discipline, my beliefs that everyone should be a lifelong learner, that there is a benefit to that, certainly as a society and individually the personal rewards are great. you know, i do believe, this is an old motto that someone came up with. it has to do with reading, but it's sort of a metaphor. you know, people should read more, not necessarily because it's going to make them feel better. it’s going to broaden their horizons. there's a difference, right? that has benefits, right? and i believe that about ideas as well. not everything needs to give you an immediate sense of satisfaction like taking a drug or doing something, spending something, you know you have that immediate buzz. so, not everything has to be motivated by that, so you know some things make you live more, not necessarily more happily. you know expose you to things, broaden your horizons. and i do believe that. and that's not to say you should do things that are going to make you feel bad. that would be ridiculous. but, sometimes challenging boundaries and doing things can benefit everyone in the long-term and that's important. the life-long learning thing and having that attitude and i really think that's crucial. so, i probably touched on that, so i can't think of anything we missed, but maybe that's one point of emphasis... let's put it... : well, thanks for having me. like i said, i wonder what motivated this, but i was happy to help out. you know, i know scheduling wise it was a little bit difficult and some of the exams were a little complicated for me... : yeah, no that'd be great. i also wonder, and i have no idea what your irb allows for, but in terms of the tests and what not – i don't know how you phrased them or whatever – are those going to be provided back? like this interview; are you going to make it available to the person you interviewed like me or? :  yeah, i'd be curious in having been in the psychometric field, just curious. i have no illusions about what this is going to tell me about me or inform my future actions. i'm just interested. you've collected all of this data and i've put in plenty of irb protocols where we're collecting data to wireless devices or psychometric questionnaires and you know the kind of give back to the patients is the data. they can ignore it, throw it out, they can choose not to accept it, but at least the offer is there and i wondered if this was part of the protocol here because someone might just be interested in having that for whatever reason and certainly i am. : yeah, yeah! basically this has taken 8 or 9 months since the first interview so i have no expectations about getting this later today, but yeah. haha. i would, if that was written in the consent form – i can't remember what i signed – and then yeah i'd like to take advantage. : okay. : okay thank you! : yeah, i know him. : nope. how long do you think it will take?  : oh yeah, because i have probably until three my time. so you should do... i don't know... as much as you can. : yeah. : -laughs-. uhh gosh i don't know. having kids is up there. um, yeah... i'm proud of the research that we’re doing, you know, too.  : i think it’s a combination of different things, right? i don't think that’s there's one ingredient but you know i think that um... for all of us i think to be successful in what we're doing we have to love it first of all, you know, so that’s the main thing. um, yeah, and i think it comes from me from um motivation to do something that’s meaningful, you know, and do something that’s good for the world. um, you know, so i think those are really good ingredients for a lot of people and for me. and then i think i worked hard, i think i have some natural talent, i think i also have had some lucky breaks.  : well, i think that my obstacles have been... i don't know, more internal than external, right? um, you know how do i manage my own feelings and motivation in a way that, you know, keeps me on the right track.  : um, i think uhh, i don’t know a lot of introspection? : you know, uhh, is one thing. i think, i don't know, i think a lot of focus on umm... on you know being grateful for what i have the opportunity to do. you know, um... and then just kinda working through the process, you know, we all have setbacks right? so setbacks for me, you know, just trying to, just to realize that that’s um, that’s the way it goes right, just keep doing my best.   : -sighs-… i think there's been several, um. one is studying placebo effects and the opportunity which was at first, you know, really i was kinda partly lucky, right, to study placebo effects and mind-body things, and then it just matched with my natural, my interests, you know, and i was able to have the opportunity and have the right interest and motivation and run with it, and along the way i think that um, i've really, you know, i feel grateful for the support of a lot of people really, you know who mentored me and supported me. i think that’s a theme, i think every, you know, everything that i've done... you know i realized that i needed people's help to do it well and to get through the obstacles, you know.  : um, i think it's been led by the results that we've been getting, you know, the science. um, and i think a focus, its also something i think that i'm proud of about our work, is that um, we're trying to do things that are sort of fundamental, you know in my case its affect and emotion and pain, so understanding how those things are constructed in the brain, you know, so and that came from the need to know –laughs- i think for research and also personally. um, you know so i really want to know the answers but i try to ask questions that i want to know the answers to.  : um, and um... yeah so um... yeah i don’t know –laughs-.  : um, well... there's a lot of possible kinds of advice but i would say... you know, i would say love what you do... and that’s, there's some part of that that doing what you love, right? but i don't think that our loves, our natural interests just kind of happen to us or, we aren't born with them you know we develop them through work and study and following other interests, you know. so i would say also, you know, try to love whatever is it that you’re doing. you know and find the value in it and seek it out and then that leads to other sources of value, right. so, yeah... so its sort of a circle right? you know of trying to find something that you do love, but also loving what you’re doing and then trying to work your way towards that, you know, and whatever it is that you're purpose is, i don't think we know our purposes in life at the start, i think we discover them.  : no i wouldn't. i don't think that it, you know –laughs-. i think life is more complicated than that. like you know i remember like [artist 1] said, "wrap your solitude around you like a blanket." so there. there could be times in which it's actually good to be alone and have few social contacts. there are obviously times when it's great to have a broad network, you know, of people. and specializing, it's hard to know because you don't know where any of us is going to be lead, you know. what the opportunities and costs are going to be. so i would say rather than this sort of trying to make sure you do x y or z in that sense, i would try to be authentic and just you know figure it out. i think intuition is really important for that.  : oh of research? : why is it important- well because –laughs-, i think there's a lot you know of reasons. mundane sort of reasons in a way, but maybe not so mundane. you know if i were telling other people that this is a good area, i think that i've been drawn to questions that really matter for people, like we're studying chronic pain and twenty per cent of the population suffers from chronic pain, it's a tremendous amount. the cost, the social cost, and costs in well being. you know and so it's if you're the kind of person who wants to understand that to do something about it- if that's kind of your call to do that, that's a really important thing to do. you know the other part of our work is studying, or just broadly speaking, mind-body processes, which are something that humans have been wondering about for thousands of years or more and people have lots of beliefs in various directions about you know, the healing power of the mind, yes, no, sometimes. and i think we need some scientific evidence in that, we need to work closer to the truth.  : yeah, that's exactly why it's important to me. and i'm also just interested in it. it's fits with what my predilections are. you know, so i want to know, i like asking questions that i really want to know the answers to, and trying to answer those questions, and i also like doing it through science because i want to learn something. i want my point of view to evolve and change. and many other- some other people may not want their point of view to evolve, they want to have a belief about something like i want to know- your mind can heal anything, right and they just want to support that belief, and they don't need to be a scientist, you know. but i do, i want to learn from evidenceand i want my beliefs to grow and change. : um, well in a sense of course - i mean things always wax and wane right, over time. you know level of motivation to do any particular kind of thing, goes up and down. but i have to say, in my view, i have a pretty high level of sustained interest over time. you know what i mean so i don't think it's waxed and waned that much.  : um, do something else. i think i try to you know, it's a balance right. in some ways, i try to do what seems the most important to me at the time, i think that's valuable, right. and you know, like for me, so sometimes i’ll spend a lot of time writing a lot of code, and other times i'll spend a lot of time writing. so maybe one thing if the other doesn't seem quite as important to me or as meaningful at the time or as a priority at the time, so i'll try to figure out what the priority is. now of course there are always times when you know what the priority is and you just don't kind of want to do that thing, you know what i mean, like write this paper that's really important but is kind of hard to get motivated to start doing it, you know. and then i just try to, i try to reinforce the importance in my mind and make sure that i just get it done, you know –laughs- instead of avoiding it, and try to have some self insight into what i'm avoiding.  : yeah, i think there's been a number of people. but some people that stand out- you know who stands out to me, personally, is the people who i've seen who love what they're doing and who are excellent at it, you know, who are just really excellent. and that i really admire. you know, so like i have, i had the clarinet teacher in, as a kid in elementary school. he's just a wonderful guy and he just was a master at what he did. and that's just inspired me. you know, i had an orchestra and piano teacher in college who was the same, she was just excellent and gives you the sense of sort of what it takes, and that and to have that kind of quality of character really, you know. other teachers and people too influenced me in that way, and in different ways right. there are examples of different people in life and work.  : yes. : um, i think everybody is different, i –laughs-, my prime directive, you know i want to help each person succeed in their own way, given their own strengths. i think we all have a complicated mix of strengths and weaknesses and interests and nonlinear paths through life and i think that, i think it's not for me to pre-judge what they're supposed to be like exactly. so i kind of help each person be the best they can in their own way. having said that, i also balance that with the practicalities of doing work in a lab. so if you're engaged and you're a post doc in my lab and you're supposed to be doing certain kinds of science and you are, and we have that common ground, then i have lots of specific ideas for how to, you know, develop skills and how to work with other people and lots of things like that. and so i do kind of model specific skills for that. : no –laughs-. you know i don't think so. i mean we all have ideas right. i mean i can look back and pick out people that i thought were going to be great at the time and then they turn out to be great, you know. but then there are some other people i thought they might be great too and then it didn't end up happening. you know i try, you know i think, we all, i think i can recognize qualities that i really value and like and that i think are really qualities that predispose somebody to success, for sure. but you know, i am not confident in my ability to predict the future. : um, that's a hard question. the biggest difference i notice, i don't feel like i feel some inherent differences except that i think it's harder to be a woman in science. you know, i think of the deck is stacked against women in several ways. i think they do often have to be better you know, and so forth to be listened to the same degree. sometimes they might have to be a little tougher on the exterior you know, in some cases, because they don't just automatically get the same level of respect. so that's the biggest difference that i see. but in terms... i don't know in terms of talent and drive, i don't see any other differences really.  : i do all the time, and, you know, i say you have to figure out how to balance it out. that's what i say, seriously. but i also say you know work hard. my philosophy is work hard and play hard really. and you know and also create a sense of rhythm if i have to say that. so, you get a rhythm so you're fully doing what you're doing when you're doing it. like when i'm at work, i'm not very distracted, you know, i don't, i don't know, check my phone, i don't surf the internet, i don't read articles except for election season, it's a little hard totally stick to that, but by and large i'm like one hundred per cent work. and i go home and i have three kids and if i'm going to be home, i need to be one hundred per cent at home. you know and being in between can be terrible. and i've also known people who, post docs for example, who they felt they needed to push themselves all the time nonstop because they weren't somehow going to cut it otherwise, even to the point of not sleeping very well or very much or taking certain drugs to increase performance, and it's just a complete disaster in my experience. because there is no sense of rhythm and then your productivity just ends up going down. so i've always enjoyed, if i'm going to take time off to do something whether its to do something with my kids, or go running, or do some other outdoor activity or see a movie or whatever it is, you know, i fully love doing that and so i'm not really having regrets so far or second thoughts about that, i think that's good to be in a cycle. i also really value the time, not being distracted by anything, including otherwise interesting news stories or podcasts or whatever that would be great sometimes, but i think we need that time where we are really just introspecting.  : of course, yeah.  : -laughs- that's an important question. i see why you want an hour and a half of time. well, you know, i think a lot of the positive influences, you know i've had a lot of peers who were really smart and creative you know. i loved - i went to graduate school in [state 1] and i loved going to graduate school there because i was just surrounded by people who were so smart and interesting, you know, and that is inspiring. that inspires more, to be your most interesting self, right, you know. so i think that yeah, having the right culture where it's okay to you know to be like that right, so a kid can be nerdy or to be whatever, to have interesting - upbeat interests, or to be creative or to be a really hard worker or whatever. that's really the positive influence. so i value that and that goes beyond graduate school too. like you know i have many colleagues i think i'd say who i see those qualities in them and i really value them. like i love when i talk to a colleague and they just really know the literature about some area, you know, and they can tell you they study, study, study and clearly they care and it's not because they needed to do that to, because they're supposed to be an expert in this or that or because that's their job, but because they're just really engaged with what they do you know. so i love that and i'm really inspired by it. : um, i have a great family, i mean i think my parents have been really loving and supportive and you know who knows where i'd be if that were not the case or left the case, you know –laughs-.  who knows, right! i think i was always very sort of emotionally sensitive and intellectually sensitive and i think in a non-supportive environment, i could have gone off on the wrong track in a serious way, maybe, who knows, right. but - so that, that kind of love and support is number one and number two i think my parents gave me lots of opportunities without me feeling like they ever kind of forced me into something, you know, so i was allowed to be very self-directed in my interests and my pursuits and what i did, you know. so i feel like although my parents had an influence over my decisions and they gave advice and so forth, i feel like my major decisions have been up to me and that gives me a lot of... it gives me a high sense of kind of self-efficacy and feeling like i can speak my mind and make my own decisions and kind of go with what i see as the right thing.  : well, that's interesting. i mean i think that, i would think you know the kids- it's entirely different sphere of life, you know. like when i was in graduate school and before i had kids, i could work, i would work every evening, you know, every night. i worked, you know - i would take breaks of course to do other things, but you know you work until midnight or two am. you know kids they need time and they don't – they don't know anything about your research or your professional life, you know limited right, and they don't really care because they need you on their own basis, you know, so it's like having a whole separate  life with them. so that's been... it's obviously taken away time from science, but i don't regret that at all because i feel like it gives you back this sort of whole other rhythm, some other part of life that' really important and really valuable. and, you know, so it kind of gives you... maybe in a sense it's good because it can give me just a sense of- like i'm back to work, you know, i can go back after i've been taking a break right. and i really think that the kids and the family is a whole other basis of intrinsic value.  : um, yeah -laughs- i don't know. you know, my mom was an artist. so, she has been painting for, you know, i don't know, more than forty years, so i think she's very creative and my dad is creative in different ways. he was a science and math guy. i don't know, yeah. we'll see about the - you know about the kids, i don't know. they are creative in their own ways. : oh yeah i have a brother. he's an er doc.  : um, well i think there are sort of two things i could say, you know. one is that i have a lot of ideas when i'm running or doing something that really disengages my sort of typical task-focused brain –laughs- you know. um, yeah, so there's that, right. i think, you know, i think i do have a sort of task focus mode where i accomplish x, y, and z and you don't want to be super creative when you're trying to get things done, you want to get it done. but then, you need to stop doing that and disengage from that and disengage from the sort of daily, you know, what do i have to do next, you know, sort of zombie killing approach to handling all the tasks of a daily life, right, and work life and then create some protected time, you know, where your mind is in a different space. and when i do that, i do have a lot of ideas i think, you know. and i think then when i think where those ideas come from, you know, they just come from kind of - i don't know - pursuing those thoughts in a very free form kind of way, but i think that's also informed by, you know, everything i've read and learned and so forth, the whole background of knowledge, you know. i think i had a lot of different interests when i was young, you know, from yoga to martial arts, ballet, ceramics, music, lots of different things and then i - practically speaking i gave up lot of those hobbies at least for the time being when i started doing science. i just do that all the time, but ,you know, all the stuff that i read - i read a ton as a kid and a lot of different things- so i think, that to me is really, really valuable, you know what i mean. so some ideas, like you know, some scientific ideas come from , you know, papers that i read and kind of all over and think creatively about, but then i think in terms of how that connects to life more broadly and what's important to me and what's important to other people. i think there's this broader background context, you know. so, i'm really grateful that i was just really interested - so interested in reading so much when i was young, for example. you know, because it's a really core part of who i am now.  : i think it's a mix of things, you know, but i have to say like i think probably there' s a kind of emotional sense of excitement about something and that you really want to do it and even if i feel like i should do x, for some reason i really want to do y, i'm probably going to do y you know –laughs-. if i have the luxury to do that and so far, and so far i have really. and so, you know yeah it's interesting because i find that what i feel like i logically should do or what's important logically to me is not always what's important emotionally. you know, i want them to line up, but you know they don't always happen. but i have to say that some of the times where i've done – where i've kind of pursued things that are, scientifically speaking, based on some emotional interest, you know, then it ends up being... being sometimes the kind of foundational part of the way that i approach science that that is really valuable for doing other things too, right. so for example, in graduate school, i, you know, i was working at the [place 1] for imaging studies of attention, but i got really interested in sort of seeing if i could program a genetic algorithm and design studies that way, right? and so i did, i put a lot of time into it, and logically what should i have been doing? probably i should have been publishing my attention papers, you know what i mean, just get them out, right. i mean that's the sort of like, you know, path to success, but i have to say that, that the programming project was really valuable for me. i learned a ton of stuff. i got some expertise in experimental design, in programming, and in those algorithms and then kind of informed the flavor of how i've worked ever since, right, and –inaudible-. so in a sense, i'm sort of more unique, you know as a scientist, right because of those other things that i've done that were driven by this emotional interest but i couldn’t really justify rationally.  : no. well, yes and no. i mean, usually there's like twenty different things to do next that are really important –laughs-. and so you figure out what's a combination of the most exciting and the most doable, right? i'm not that... you know, in terms of science, like i try to temper you know creativity with pragmatism, right? because i think you need, you need a combination of both right, and so, you know, if something seems really interesting but not doable... then it's not a great science project, you know. and something's doable but boring it also might not be a very good science project. so, that’s, you know... that’s kinda my decision process.  : um... i believe it’s a dialogue. that’s my ideal. but one of the phrases i've learned from studying music as an undergraduate, um it actually came from a, from christian science, which is a religion, which is a quote from this religious leader but that doesn't really matter, um. "it’s the rhythm of head and heart." so when i was learning to compose music in college, that's what i was striving for. the rhythm of head and heart which resonated with me. so the head part is the music is intellectual development, right? um, and the heart part is, it sounds like music, you love it, you enjoy it, right? um, in science, i think the head part is, "is this project accomplishable?", "what will it add to the literature?", you know, "what kinds of niches does it fill?", um... you know, "how will it be received" and... "how important and so on". and then the emotional part is that, you know, -inaudible- bit it's something that’s aesthetic or interesting or cool, right, that you have a sense that it's exciting. um, so i really think it’s a dialogue, you know for me, and if you go off in one direction, you could be super creative and just never really do anything, right, or do something that’s so unconstrained that it can't... it can't speak to other people or to society, you know, in some important way or the science or the field, or you can do something that’s so rational that you, that you put blinders on and you miss the opportunity that you never even knew would have been possible.  : yeah, kind of, yeah. i mean i think it depends and it varies of course. but, you know, one pathway that i like is... i think of it as a scientific project right? i like to... to think of the core concept and that might come from some results that we got, you know, that maybe were a little different than expected or very different or something, right? but some question of interest right? and you start wondering about, um... and that’s of course an informed question, right? you know, based on expertise and so forth. but... you know so you start with this question and then kind of, you know, i wanna be able to flesh out what the big picture is and what the narrative is, so i try to put experiments together into a narrative, you know, and think about alternatives and what the sort of the flow of the story is, and i like to get to that point, this is what i, i try to do this too with the people that work in my lab, right? it gets to the point where you kind of know that cold, like you can do it when you’re sitting and you know... on a bus or something, thinking, right, and you can go through the points of logic and its clear, so i try to get that clear, you know, as much as possible and then sort of flesh out the details. and so if it's a paper then yeah it might come down to, you know, writing an outline, what are the critical questions, what are the critical findings, and then what's the next unanswered question, what analysis do we need. and then, sort of fleshing out, and then i like to do the figures... i'm visual, you know, so i like to see the data. so i like to say well just let me see this data, this data, these figures and does this support that, you know the conclusions and the points and so on are leading us in a different direction, so i like to do that, the sort of figures and the main conclusions, you know, first, -inaudible- with that, and then um... you know and then sort of flesh it out and write, um... the rest of it and um and i think inevitably then as you write the details, you realize that maybe you weren't so clear on the big picture –laughs- right? or you know on some of the structural elements and so then you go back and revise it if you need it, you know. so that's, uh, that's a sketch.  : um, well both are different things. i really enjoy working with people. i've, you know, worked with a lot of good people. really enjoy collaborating and again if it's, you know, if it's the people that i like, and i like a lot of people –laughs-. now, when it comes to doing kind of a creative process or like writing a section or writing a, you know, program or whatever, you know, sometimes it's pretty hard to get into the nitty gritty of that with other people and it's actually nice to be alone and just kind of flow and create something, right. so, if i'm trying to create something, you know, i like creating something according to my vision, right, and my mental process, where it's unconstrained. you know, and then i do well, can –inaudible- that to other people because i really do think that the stuff that i do - i used to think, really, i used to think that if i can create something from my mind and that is so great and i love it, then it can - that's valued and it can exist in a vacuum, right. like i don’t want other people telling me to change what i did because it was my idea and i like it –laughs-.  : that's - but i don't feel like that anymore because i think that i want the things that i do, i'm kind of functional right? whatever i create, i want other people to be able to use it, benefit from it, appreciate it hopefully, right, in some way. so if other people, whose interests are subjective, and if other people don't find the value in that and like it, you know, i think i need to work with that and change my ideas, you know what i mean? so that's been something where i really... i think i've changed as a person how i approach things... you know? but i think it's probably a good thing. : um, yes. you know, i think time is limited, but i always have very clear goals, yeah –laughs-. : i... i don't think i've ever felt like i was out of ideas. i mean... yeah. i think it's more like there are so many ideas and you have to prioritize them and think about which ones you want to develop and so forth. so, i always have a lot more ideas... way more than me or my lab can really do. : um... i probably work from 8:30 – 6:30 most days... so that's ten hours times five... that's fifty hours a week plus probably another... i don’t know, depending on what i'm doing... maybe another ten to twenty hours a week, you know in the evenings or something like that after the kids go to bed. so let's call it – let's call it fifty to seventy hours of work, work week. and that also includes travel time as work time and so on. and then the rest of the time, that's saved for something else –laughs-. : now... i usually get like, a minimum night's sleep, i would say seven to eight hours. yeah. i think there have been periods like when i've been really engaged in some projects, you know, where i will sleep less for quite a period of time, you know. i don't want to be sleep restrictive though, because i don't think it's healthy long term, you know, so i try not to do that, even though naturally... like i would say naturally in graduate school and even after, i was a fairly short sleeper. i was pretty resilient i could do... i could sleep five or six hours a night off and on for months. so like for a few days, and then sleep longer for one or two days, and then, you know sleep less again. but that really varies with the engagement, right. if i'm really locked onto some project, that's going to make me sleep less. but in general, i sleep a normal night's sleep. : oh, interesting. in terms of like work products?  : um... : yeah. i resonate with that. who did i just read a quote from? tt was a poet i - who was it... who said, you know, if you don’t have any ideas, it all goes –inaudible- when you go to work anyway. i think [author 1] also said something like that, you know, so ya, i think that's right. i mean, you know, in terms of my work, um... and other things i've done too, you know, i think it's very iterative, you know, whether it's within a project, like paper drafts, i used to think that my first draft was somehow sacred because i wanted to think of myself as a good writer and then i was disabused to that notion and now i don’t think like that anymore. i think that iteration... twenty drafts, thirty drafts... you know, across projects too. i think of a lot of the work we're doing as iterative, like we have, you know, we do a, a, a... an experiment or a series of experiments, a scientific project, or... you know we do our best, we close the deal on it and publish it and then... but that's like the stepping stone to the next projects. so, i feel a lot of growth over time if that... does that relate to what you're talking about? : yeah. : always. : -laughs- : um, that's a hard question. i... um... i think for me, there's a point at which, you know, you feel it, i mean, you know, number one, it has to be right. you have to believe that you've done it right, you know, and the right stories, and the right results and conclusions. um, and then... you know... it's a hard problem because you could always add, you know, other ways of looking at it, other analyses, other things, right? you know, and this is a personality kind of issue, right? that, you know, some people will come in, and i was kind of like this where it's just never done, you know, because i was kind of a perfectionist and so then i always want to do the next thing and keep on improving it and keep making sure and etc. etc. but then you can never... you don’t bruise anything. so, i've tried to sort of like, you know, i don't know kind of tune my personal aesthetics, right, in relation to what are the standards in the deal. so once you know it's right, and also what's going to be a narrative that's satisfying, right, and kind of complete description of, you know, of finding. and i think that then adding a bunch of things is bad. you know.  : so my ideal, yeah... : oh it's okay. i think my ideal thing is that's an aesthetic kind of preference, right. where it's right and it's balanced and there's a sense of proportion to it, you know, to the project and then you're like, it's done. and it doesn’t mean that's the last thing that i'm ever going to do like this, right. so, i did a lot of ceramics when i was in college, a lot, and it's just like this, you know, so i take metaphors, right, that mean a lot to me, and i take them and apply them to my –inaudible- so where if you're throwing a pot, you know, you kind of have to do it, and you do a certain amount of fiddling with it and then stop and then throw it and then it's done and if it's not perfect, it's not perfect, and you do another one because if you keep fiddling with it for too long, it will collapse, literally. you'll scrape it off the wheel and throw it away, you know what i mean? so like, you can't fiddle with something forever, so the best thing is like, you do it, you do the best you can, it's done, you either keep it or you trash it, and you do it again. and you, you know you get better and you keep it or trash it and do it again. you can't rework the same thing forever.  : um, more than most.  : fewer than some –laughs-. : actually, it's funny because i want to say more, but that seems like impossible. but i think it's kind of true. so, my lab has grown, so i've been able to have a lot of projects and do so many, right. so that's the thing where, but our project time is... it's really like two or three to seven years, you know? and it doesn't have to be that long, but it ends up being that long often, practically speaking, you know. and lately, we're always trying to build. like, we're aggregating data tests and we're building and so it's kind of evolving right. so i don't know. i do think that i put, you know every project that i've sort of cared about, has been a lot of work and care, you know what i mean? and they do take a long time to evolve, but there's a lot of them happening in parallel i guess, right, so a lot of stuff is coming out. : yeah : yeah... how do i? : yeah, i am a big believer in this kind of non-directed thinking, you know. and i think, you know, as a scientist, i think that that's actually kind of distinct from working memory capacity, personally, but that's an empirical question, you know like so i connect that more with going running and daydreaming, right, where stuff kind of comes up and you can kind of put these things together, rather than sort of directed thoughts where you retrieve a and you retrieve b and you kind of put stuff together. um, but i'm sure working memory probably plays an important role in some way, you know. but yeah, i think that's right, you know. so in addition to science, i see it play out more in other stuff that i've done that is not scientific. like writing poetry, right. i've written a lot.. well more in the past than recently, but i enjoy writing poetry and i used to write a lot of poetry and i think that it's... there is this kind of remote associate thing right? something just reminds you of something and it's this sort of  multisensory image or idea and then you kind of, you know, explore that. so there is that sense of putting different, you know different things together that i'm a believer in. : um, i think actually, yeah i think so. i mean i think i'm pretty broad like that, you know. i think i'm pretty associative. you know, as opposed to being highly linear directed and organized, i think i'm... you know not linear if you want to use that word –laughs- right. yeah, i'm kind of associative in that way, you know, but i think that in terms of my career as a scientist, i've tried very hard to focus in on logistics, and pragmatics, and organization, you know what i mean, because that's the sort of business end and getting it done end but i think that the, you know, sort of more associative day-dreaming kind of thing has been there. : um, highly focused when i'm engaged. : um, you know, stuff that i resonate with a certain kind of information, you know, stuff that i really care about, some, you know, fact information kind... i'll remember it for the rest of my life pretty much. i have terrible memories for like sports and media and movies. terrible. i couldn't... you know... yeah. i think it's also that implicitly, i really just don't value remembering that stuff, you know. so it's not like everything sticks, right, but some things really stick. : they have my whole life. but i've also worked very hard to not be.  : that's how i compensate, right, and train myself to... you know because i think it's like scaffolding that you're channeling, right? to have a lot of creative energy. i feel like i've always had a lot of creative energy in that way, i think. but then, i want to channel that into getting something done, so i try to compensate. : um, i think i'm fairly uninhibited in terms of impulses. i think i have pretty strong impulses and emotions about things and i don't feel like i'm terribly good at inhibition –laughs-. you know what i mean? but then, i kind of organize my life too in a way that, you know, so wouldn't lead be into trouble... you see what i mean? but, i don't know. like, take smoking. i either smoke or don't. that's a kind of inhibition, right, that you have to exercise or not. i think if i started smoking, i would probably become terribly addicted, so i'm just not going to start.  : not impulsive. no, no... : no, i... i think i'm pretty planful. you know what i mean? : um, no. : no.  : hmm... i don't know. it's just fun, you know... : it's fun just talking about these things, yeah.  : i hope you do like transcripts or something of people. that would be really fun, you know?  : yeah, but i'd love to read other people's narratives, right, if people would give permission. : yeah. it's fun to hear about how other people kind of do things and approach, you know, all of these questions that you raise too, so that's pretty neat.  : it'd be a really fun kind of like um, you know, like web archive of people who are willing to have their full transcript posted, which i would be, you know what i mean, like why not and then you could just go like kind of read, you know, read through their responses. : i wouldn't be the only one... i'm sure i wouldn’t really, you know. but it's like, you know, story corps or something, i know those are different stories, but it's pretty neat, right.  : it's this sort of... you know... i'm always curious about how other people do things because these, you know, a lot of questions you ask are things we all think about and struggle with and try to manage in our lives and so forth, right so... : thank you. yeah, it's a really neat project so, you know, i wish you luck with it and i hope that you send out to all of us, you know, stuff when it starts coming out and see what you find.  : alright [interviewer], nice to talk to you. : developed the world’s hardest metal. metal hard enough to scratch diamond. you can use edm, electric discharge machine. graphene work – happy with it – you can use it for energy storage – made a super capacitor out of it. in a couple of years, you can charge your cell phone or camera within 20 seconds.  : good students who make all the discoveries. i just sit there and write up results.  : i mean sure. i think there is a certain amount of creativity involved in that you have to conceive of a project and when students bring you results, you have to be able to filter out what is positive from what is negative. i think that is the most important thing in science. because, you know, because discoveries always look like they're accidents, but they're not accidents because, what you know 100 people could have looked at the same phenomenon and not understood it. i'll give you an example, one of my students looked at a beaker and saw that he had residue on the side of the beaker and i guarantee you that 1,000 people have seen the phenomenon. except, he realized that the material he was doing was literally crawling up the side of the beaker and he turned it into a process for making coatings, which is basically if you think about salad dressing oil and water, they don’t mix. you shake them up. if you observe them carefully, they form a catenoid and break up, they will extrude things up the sides of the walls. so if the walls hydrophilic, which most walls are they have hydroxyl groups, so water will go up the sides. now image putting nanoparticles at the interface in that salad dressing between oil and water, and shaking it, as the catenoid breaks up, it will extrude the nanoparticles up the side of the wall. so, he observed this phenomenon. other people had seen it, but no one realized it was useful. and so he turned this into a process in which you can coat nanoparticles or nanolayers of almost anything. so, i nominated him for the inventor of the hall of fame competition and he came back with a silver medal. : absolutely. so, i think we have group meetings once a week and one of the students presents an in-depth presentation on what they're doing. what works and what doesn’t work. i ask a lot of questions, an awful lot of questions. i think they get the idea and the senior students also chime in and ask a lot of questions too. and so, i think they look at this and they get the we're trying to get to the essence of what has somebody discovered, what do they need to do next. what have they not discovered. what controls have they not done. and so, i think that very careful observation plus, just being very, you know, critical. but in a scientific way, not in a, so people don’t feel like they're personally being attacked, just that they need to understand what they're doing. : okay. i do know the name because i read the… no i read about...there's a guy who wrote a book on curiosity and he goes through very, he has various, he interviews various people about their curiosity, but it's really creativity. : yes. absolutely, because when you do experiments, nine out of ten times you’re getting negative results. i think some of my, i wouldn’t say colleagues here, but let's say colleagues around the world. i think some people pushed incredibly hard and i think what they're doing is telling their students that they should work, you know a huge amount of time because most things are going to fail and therefore they can pick out what works. but, i'm not sure if that’s the best strategy. in fact, i like its oppressive and i don’t follow that. but i think you're right. if you can get people to be critical of what they're doing and be very observant of what they're doing, then they can often with less effort get just as good, if not better, results. : so you are saying the more you produce... hm. well, i mean. in scientific research if you had a fully formed idea and you wanted to do it, it will still take a couple of years to put it out there because you have to do it, you have to repeat it, you have to do all of the control experiments. you have to make sure it's right. so i don’t think you can rush. i think the people that do rush often make mistakes.  : probably when i was pretty young. i don’t know how old i know my brother had a chemistry set i used to play with it. i didn’t have my own, but anything that he did, i wanted to do better.  : yeah, older brother. : two years.  : in a little town in [state] called [town]. : yes, to a point. my father was the town physician. he did everything. and i remember when i was 8 years old, he called my brother and i into the garage and he said "sons, i don't want to ever see you playing with chemicals because this is what happens." and he spent all day sewing up this kid. and he said this kid would not be alive if he hadn't of been wearing glasses, because he couldn't see well. and so he opened up, he had a handkerchief, and he opened up the kids glasses and they were stained with like an inch of just stuff from when this chemical reaction blew up. so, basically, he didn’t say don't do chemistry, he said don’t scale anything that's dangerous. :  yeah, it stuck with me. on the other hand, by the time i got to high school, there was an excellent chemistry teacher and then he became a principal at another school so then by my senior year, they got a replacement. we had a graduate student who had taken a year off to teach us high school chemistry and he didn’t know much about teaching. so, after a semester, he said, for the next semester, he said you can do anything you want. so, just tell me what you are going to do. so, i extracted caffeine from tea leaves. one of my friends built rocket motors. so every week, we used to go outside, and he would try to launch his rocket. and every time he tried, it would explode on the launch pad. until the last day and when he lit the rocket and it took off, it went up to about 20 feet, and we all broke into applause. and then, it turned around and exploded. : oh um, it worked just fine, until one day that um, when i was boiling benzene. we didn’t know benzene was carcinogenic then. so that’s what i needed to extract the caffeine. and then one day, i needed a little more of hot benzene, so i took my bunsen burner and i took my test tube filled with benzene and uh, of course, as soon as it got too hot, the fumes came out and i had fire all over the place. : yeah, so that's how i learned chemistry. : yeah, and also, i was really interested in actually biology and not chemistry because i had a really good biology course. i remember in the second year of biology, we were doing experiments with um, chickens, where we would put testosterone into the female chickens to see what happens. yeah, i don’t think you can do this anymore. people would probably protest. but, i've just found this whole thing fascinating, until i got to college when i learned that most of biology, at the lower level, is a naming science. which, i can’t stand. : so a naming science means you spend years literally learning the names of things. so, for instance, when i was learning freshman biology and i was bored for freshman biology, i asked my biology friends who were majoring in biology, what's the best course. many of them told me embryology. so i was at [university 2]. you could take anything you wanted. you didn’t need any prerequisites. so i took embryology. and by the time i got done, memorizing the 6,000th part of an embryo, i decided it was not for me. same with organic chemistry! i remember taking organic chemistry and um, when into the exam. knew all of the reactions, mechanisms, and there was nothing about this on the exam. it was, who did this reaction. what reactant goes here. and so, to me, that’s a naming science. doing research in that, is probably fascinating. but, you have to memorize everything to get there, and so i, i… : so another way i ended up being a chemist, is my freshman year, i was so bored in freshman chemistry. i walked into the chairs office and said i was bored in freshman chemistry. and he said, do you know kinetics and thermodynamics? and i said yes. and he said, well, you shouldn’t be in freshman chemistry. i said, that’s what i thought. can i do research. and he was like, oh. he said, it's true. we do have a research program for freshman, but it's all filled. i said truly, there must be somebody. and he sent me to the guy in charge who said to me the same story. and again, i said sure there must be somebody. he said, then again there's this chemistry professor who's in the engineering building and that nobody would talk to and, so why don’t you go see him. and so i went to go see him. and he gave me an experiment to do. he told me to grow crystals. and, he told me to ask another senior undergrad if i had any questions. and so, 6 weeks later i ran into the hall and he asked if i'd had any luck. and i said, yeah. and so he came down the hall and saw the crystals and he said, that's it. you're hired. i spent 4 years with him and became a chemist. : yes, absolutely. that's about right in fact, i learned the idea. so i'll tell you more to the story. so when he went down to see the crystals. i was growing the crystals in essentially jello. and i had them in fish tanks to control the temperature. and he pulled out the first giant test tube of jello in it and he's like this is amazing. and so, i found out later that he assigned this to a grad student who had failed to grow the crystals. so that was a good thing, right? and then he pulls out the second test tube, and he's like "this is even more amazing." he's like, "don’t tell me you've varied the ph." haha no. and he kept saying all these things and then i realized, i hadn't done an experiment. he told me to grow crystals and so i just grew crystals, i hadn't varied anything. so, i very quickly learned how to do a proper experiment. so this is. : oh, well, you know. i told you i had a good experience in high school chemistry because i was left alone. i had, you know, my undergraduate advisers were unbelievable in that, he was very hard driving. probably manic depressive. so, but um, you know, he was always after people in group meetings, you know, just trying to dig into what it is they have actually done, and what they hadn't done, and what they shouldn't do. and so, and then, i went on to graduate school. um, a friend of mine, the guy who taught me my freshmen year. he told me to get my degree and to get over to the [university 3], they had made this amazing discovery. they had discovered the first conducting plastic. so, i went and i worked in this plastic and it was really quite interesting. if i showed you a piece, it looks like a plastic but it decomposes in air. so we had to do everything under inert atmosphere. so, 20 years later, my adviser and co-adviser shared the nobel prize for the discovery of the first conducting polymer, and for the work that i and a hundred other people did. so, i was invited back to the [university 3] and said we had a joke that, when i was growing up in grad school, that he had never heard and no one would ever tell him this. and the joke is, what's the only true application of the material poly-acetylene. and the answer is to produce phd's. because of the sensitivity. so in today’s occasion, it's a dual use material. yeah. so i learned, and this guy had completely different style. and his style, was that he's always busy, he was always travelling around the world. but when he got interested in what you’re doing, he was just constantly interested in what you're doing. to the point where my roommate, who was in law school says that if he calls on a saturday morning before 9:00am one more time, he's going to tell him where to go. so, he would leave you alone for large stretches, and then, he would just be after you, you know, five times a day. because he wanted to, he just had to know the results of a certain experiment. : that is about the most single-minded focus i had ever seen. no, he had just decided that there was something important. it just compensated, he just produced ideas. he would spit out 10 ideas and 9 of them would be silly. but, he would just have a large group. and so, he would tell different people to do them. and he had people that people would do them. no one would tell him that they were silly. he also had a really interesting phenomenon. one time, i had a really good idea and i told it to him and he was like, that's nice [participant's name], but go do what i suggested. so, 6 months later he was travelling in europe. and in those days, to get a phone call from europe was a big deal. but i got a phone call from the airport in europe. he's like, i was just talking to you know, one of the world’s leading electrochemist. and i had the most fascinating talk and i had this brilliant idea. and he tells me my exact idea. and i said, don’t worry, it will be done by the time you get here, because i had already done it. i just wasn't going to talk about it until the proper occasion. so, what i think, and, i really think he truly had that idea. because one of the things i watched, is, he would take information from many people and he would just absorb it. he was just as sponge. and then, he would redo it in his mind, and eventually, it would come out as his idea. and it really was his idea, it didn't come from someplace else. but you could watch the process going on. : i think the most important thing is drive and determination. if somebody's going to work hard. you know, i don’t need a students to do synthetic chemistry. i do need b+ students to do synthetic chemistry, but um, if they're a students, it's a bonus. but if they have a strong work ethic. if they are going to make sure that things get done, then they will succeed one way or another. : so, i lead by example. i have 3 kids. i try to play squash every day. : the oldest is now 23. and then 19, and then 16. yeah, so, you know. i strike some balance that i think my students see that. : i try to, yeah. i average about 5 days a week. i haven't played since last night. i've got another game tonight. : you know, for somebody who doesn’t play, then i look good. for somebody who's really good, then i look good. so, it's all relative, right. i do it for the exercise. it's the most efficient sport. it burns the most calories per unit of time of any sport. kickboxing is number 2. : no. (-laughs-) i just, i really like it. in fact, my wife handed me another article that is like playing chess, which is what i really like to do. : not anymore, but that's what i used to do when i was a kid and there was nothing else to do. in fact, i'll tell you… : yeah. um, so when i was 17, i won the national high school chess championship, and it was such a big upset. it was such a big upset, in fact, my team won, that i ended up with my picture in [magazine]. sounds good, right? my chess coach/ geometry teacher sent a little blurb to [magazine], because my team from this town of 10,000 won the sports championship and i won the individual championship. and on the second to last page, they have a picture of our faces. i burned my 15 minutes of fame.  : i don't think so.  : (-laughs-)  : oh, so you're familiar with chess ratings. so, by the time i finished high school, i was above 2,200 and in fact, if you won't to know the last time i played, so 15 years ago, one of my friends was visiting and he said, there's this title called life master. and they never sent me my certificate. so i called up the us chess federation and said, i never got my life master title. and they said, well, you became a life master at the time you finished high school. and you've played 223 games as a master, and you need to play 300 to get a life masters certificate. and so, my wife said to find those tournaments that you get those games in. and so, santa monica once a year holds a chess championship. it's 8 games on monday nights, once a week. and so, i'm like, i can do that. and so for a couple of weeks i tried to remember what i'm supposed to do. and so i went there, i tied for first place, got my certificate, and haven't played after that. : yeah, no i was. well, i’ll tell you what. i played some good players. i remember one game. i came up with, it was this really brilliant sacrifice, and it just seemed so familiar. i looked it up and it was a known concept, and so, i must have, when i was a little kid, like seen this idea. and it came back to me like 30 years later. : i suspect that that’s what i had done. : what is that? haha. something in the brain? : yeah, no. when i read about the 10,000-hour rule, then i realized that i probably spent a huge amount of time playing chess. like i said, when you grow up in a small town, there's not a lot to do.  : my brother taught me how to play. when he was 7, he picked up a book and decided he needed someone to play with and so he taught his five-year-old brother. and so my father still says to this day he doesn’t know how to play. : so, i can tell you how i learn, because i can't. if i start reading a book, i will probably fall asleep somewhere in it. but if i listen to a book on tape, i'll absorb everything. yeah, it's pretty interesting. so like, i listen to non-fiction books when i drive and, you'll get a kick out of this. one time, when the da vinci code was really popular. i checked that out. i went home to my wife and said is this all true? and she's like oh my god. because i listen to non-fiction all the time. and so i had to pick up another book on tape about why the da vinci code is not true. somebody from the clergy and then i was convinced that it is all true if you have to go through all that trouble. : it's a tool to understand. you know, when i deal with my students, they are constantly telling me things. and then, they'll show me graphs and things. but i probably hear better than anything else. i'm just guessing. because i always wonder, you know, when i teach. i'm trying to understand what gets through to students. and i tell them, you know, that some of them need to take notes, because, that's how they learn. and some of them need to read notes because that's how they learn. some of them need to read models, some of them need to go online. and i will record, i do podcast for the large undergraduate classes. i haven't yet done videotaping of the, even though they offer that. but i worry that students won’t come to class if i do that. and i need them to come to class because i do a lot of experiments in class that are visual.  : i listen to books on tape.  : just papers from literature. : i read a fair amount. i read a fair amount because at some point, i decided that if i wanted to go to college, i had to know a lot of stuff. so, i just started reading novels. so i just started reading novels and russian literature. dostoevsky became my favorite author. in college, i even took and an entire course in dostoevsky. they said if you want to take a course in dostoevsky and you don’t read russian, you need to talk to the instructor. so talked to the instructor and said, i don’t speak russian. and the instructor said, do you like dostoevsky and i said yes, of course.   : that's a good question. i wish i would have learned this early on. i didn't know this in college, so. probably started when i started driving, i suddenly realized that if i checked anything out, i would remember it all. i don’t like to see, my life will tell you, i don’t like to see a movie twice because it's like i remember most of it. : probably. : occasionally when my book on tape runs out before i download the next one.  : no. i got stuck on the queen when i was in college. i went to see them a couple of times. and then i found out my daughter liked queen, probably because i would listen to it occasionally. so when they had a revival concert, i took her. she thought that was really cool. : rational and intuitive. in other words, it just comes to you, that would be intuitive and rational would be... : i occasionally have hunches. you know, i would talk to students, and they’ll, you know. what i 've learn very quickly is that you cannot tell a student to do something that they don’t want to do. so my first graduate student, i told him what i thought and he said that won’t work, and i said what do you think will work? and he told me and i said i don't think that'll work. so in the lab, it took him 5 months, but he got what he wanted to do to work. and he showed me that what i wanted didn’t work. yeah, so, and i'm i'm still not convinced that my idea was... who knows! but then again his still worked. it convinced me, that you know, you need to figure out what people are passionate about. and if they are, they'll get it to work, even if you don’t have the right idea. so i'm not wedded to my ideas. my graduate advisor was completely wedded to his ideas and occasionally, he had a good one, and not always. but i realize that the students, probably, you know, they're going to work on something- and i have a lot of projects going on- they will know more about something than i do and if they’re motivated they’ll find something more important than i will.  : so, this is the one part of the testing that i completely failed.  : oh yeah. yeah. you gave me a list of things to remember and i would remember just a few of them because i would just pick off the last few that i could remember.  : yeah. and then, um, and you come back and say, well, can you name some furniture? and i would be like, oh yeah, there's some furniture there. and could you name this? oh yeah, there's some of that. but otherwise, i couldn’t, i didn’t know you were going to repeat this an infinite times. yeah, and i found that rather intimidating. so that is like, memory, memory is not. but, but if i am working with scientific principles, so i will, those i'll maintain. because, you know, because you'll work with something for so long, and scientifically what you are trying to do is knock something out. because if you, all you have to do is prove something wrong once and it's not right. but you have to test things infinite number of times to maintain it as a constant, so. : no, i don't tend to do that. but i have a number of students and we, as i mention, we do this collectively once a week, but i also, students also come to see me privately to show me what they're doing. so i probably do something like what my advisor does because, you know, whether you're a parent or an advisor you're going to repeat the same things that you see. so i do absorb information that someone is telling me or showing me. and the next student, i'll probably, if they're working in a related area, i'll test the idea on them, and keep coming back. and eventually, you come up with some interesting concept or interesting experiment that needs doing. : so, i am very willing to go in explore areas that i don’t understand. which, i think most scientists don’t like to do because, it’s very comfortable working in areas that you do understand. and if you go into new areas, then you have to spend a long time and you're going to make mistakes. you're going to make stupid mistakes, because you just don’t know. but along with those stupid mistakes, you may actually discover something because you may do other things no one else will do. so i am willing to do that because i have students who are more knowledgeable about these things and as long as you'll realize that they'll help you and they'll explain it to you and you can go read it and study it or just keep asking questions until you do understand it, i bet that will work. : okay. haha, the correlation is negative? : yeah unfortunately i not very disagreeable.  : challenging existing dogma. : so i think my area is different than what you're talking about because i make new materials. so i am going to make new materials with different properties, and so i don’t need to challenge existing dogma because it’s very unlikely like you're going to find a new material that doesn’t fit into some pattern. you are going to find a new material with new properties. but, you will still. i mean, i'll give you an example. super conductivity. there's a theory called bsc theory of superconductivity by those that discovered it. and when, you’ve probably heard of high temperature super conductors and that you can levitate a magnet using liquid nitrogen. : yeah, well you still have to chill them, but you can chill them down to liquid nitrogen temperatures to perfect them, instead of liquid helium, would be a whole lot better. : well when they first made those high temperature super conductors, i happened to be giving lecture at [university 4]. and the guy that came up with the high temperature one was also giving a lecture. so i gave one in morning and in the afternoon, we all trucked over at the institute for theoretical physics. so he came there and gave this lecture, and he's a physicist, so he was talking about how he made a black phase and green phase, but he didn’t know which one was the super conductor. and i'm sitting there thinking, my undergraduate advisor said, if it conducts electrically and it's metallic, then it's black or shiny, those are the only choices. and so i'm sitting there and i'm like, i don’t understand this. you know, what does he not understand, but he was like, there may be new physics involves and therefore it could be the green phase, i guess. but nobody said anything, and of course it was the black phase. because in order to be a super conductor, you have to be a metal in the normal state, and you know, metals are shiny or black depending on whether they're smooth or powder. so what i'm telling you is that there isn’t new physics and i am not going to discover new physics. but i will discover new materials of new properties. i can make you incredible high surface area materials that can store energy faster or better than anything that you've have before. so i don’t need to rail away against existing theories.  : yeah, well in doing synthetic chemistry, there's always new approaches and new ways of doing things. so for example, we discovered a process, for instance in which actually make the carbon, the graphene, we need to make a 3-dimenshional material. in fact, my post-doctoral advisor, in which i didn’t talk about. i was in a postdoctoral at [university 5] for 2 years after getting my phd. and he is like, you know, he's the guy who discovered first noble gas compound. so, for, until the early 1960's, noble gases were considered noble. and then he did an experiment where he showed you can make noble compounds out of them. in fact, it’s a really fascinating story, um, he was making a, he was a high oxidation state fluorine chemist. fluorine chemistry is rather dangerous because fluorine is the most reactive element we know. and so he made this compound that, ptf6, platinum hexo-fluoride, so it's one of the most highly oxidized or oxidizing compounds known. and so, it's so oxidizing that it will take oxygen out of the air and make a solid out of it. and so his colleagues when he was an assistant professor asked about what he had done and told them about this compound. and they didn’t believe him, because it didn’t make sense to them because oxygen is a gas, and to make solid out of gas. so i think he was kind of disheartened about this, and when he tells this, he was teaching freshmen chemistry and realized he talks about how hard it is to oxidize different compounds. and of course, the hardest compound to oxidized is helium, but as you go down, helium to neon to argon to krypton, it gets easier. and when you get to xenon, he realized that it's easier to oxidize xenon than oxygen. and so that tells you immediately that his platinum compound should oxidize zenon. so it was a friday afternoon when he realizes. he goes into the lab and couldn’t find a student so he did the experiment himself. and so he took is platinum compound and exposed it to xenon and formed a solid. so, i mean, that’s the kind of creativity goes into what i do. so, he also talked about something, his, the, the department of energy told him that he had to do something practical if he was going to keep getting money from the government. the compounds he was working on didn’t seem to them to have any practical. so he said, i will work on graphite. graphite is the world’s most electro- material, it's in every battery. and i'll take my high oxidative state fluorides and i'll integrate them into graphite. and so that's what he did. but he talked about his goal or the thing that he thought was most important as far as energy storage, and was something he called holey graphite, spelled h-o-l-e-y. he was going to, he said, graphite is the world’s best electro material, it comes out of the ground, its cheap, it is highly conductive, but it has one defect- low surface area. and so he had idea to drill 3-dimanshional holes to increase surface area. well, years later, we were making this precursor to graphene. we hit it with a laser and it turns out it blows off carbon dioxide. it's got some hydroxyl groups on it. and what it forms is holey graphite. yeah. and that is stuff we can store huge amounts of energy with very quickly. and so i was invited three years ago to [university 5] to give the [name of lecture]. unfortunately, it was the memorial [name of lecture]. and so i told this story, and my whole thing was talking about holey graphite and what we've done with it. and i went out to dinner with 5 of his colleagues and one of his family members. and they were like, oh yeah, he always talked about this holy graphite. which shocked me because professors as you probably gathered, if they have a dream or an idea, they share it with their students in hopes that their students go do it. but they would never share it with their colleagues because 2 things can happen. either their colleagues laugh at them because it’s a ridiculous idea, or if it’s a really good idea, they’ll steal it. yeah. so anyway, he had this dream and unfortunately, we realized this dream, but after too late. when i got here, he told me i should keep working on what i was working on, new forms of graphite, and i realized that that was his work, not my work. so i moved on, but i needed upcoming bac to it eventually. : oh good. : the hand of the resolution it had or something? : interesting interesting : well its like japanese thing or they are very good in hardware but in software many times its not as good as the reason that apple take over sony right  : well its actually for research wise my experience after my graduate school i came to ucla as a postdoc that’s where a life changing experience for me so that’s where i mean scientifically that’s most recognizable work i have been was done in los angeles that’s actually the quite the exciting like ucla  :  well so you my phd actually is this way in my phd i'm doing organic semi-conductor for lighting or basically its an organic light emitting dials research so you give it electricity so it gives lights out and i came to ucla i was working on projects that called the solar cells that's basically it’s the printable kind of polymer used kind of polymer as the major material for solar cell and of course that because its polymer so you can use solution to process it so at the beginning of 2000 i came here in 2004 that’s when one of the emerging area and we happens to do we do some creative work there and that’s actually where ucla the group professor diane's that we start more or less from nothing and then become a work leader in the field and after that we actually start up a company so i actually after 3 years of postdoc i kind of become the first one or two technical people in the start up company and we continue to break the world records so since become exciting yeah  : well on i'm not going to say its from nothing its like we start i mean this is more or less a new project for this group we start from material that’s its actually the material is not new material it has been there for 10 years or something its so we found out that control what we call the morphology or say what the control where those polymers change whatever can be aligned into that material that’s inhumed play a significant role of a role in a determining its performance so that kind of we call it morphological control say on that more whether we should call new material or the material you have different standards so that where we do significant work and the world recognized that contribution and after that we go for new materials we go for new processes and that’s we go step by step so that’s where it’s a field that ucla was recognized as a world leader : with a group in university of chicago that and they now make molecules that different type in fact that packing mechanism is also very different from the first generation yeah so that so together that we i mean los angeles part and chicago part do quite a bit of work and we i mean we were the one actually first to break 7% 8% blah blah now is 10% and 11% those kind of barriers so that’s and then after that five years ago i came back to ucla as a research faculty here and we continue that say now we have done lots of work on say how to control those synfume (? around 1:10) morphology how to make new materials on the other hand we are not chemists we are not the one die hard for the materials in but we are more like device oriented and we see well we should as the leading group we should do something that basically another route for the few to go so what we do here instead of doing single junction what we call single junction device  we build tandem with basically tandem means two or three things devices you can act together so that's a major thing that’s happened in ucla in the last few years and we showed the world how can you build tandem multijunction devices that’s the solution process how can you build those in so called you have to cells in between (new audio file): you have your new material which is good or something then we now tell you we can make a new device of structure to further improve the performance so that’s we think that’s another way for us to contribute to the field : correct : i'm the pi that’s assigned  : oh okay  : how do i think, say for this field we doing experiment first and coming into things and then use logical thinking to design further experiment and then you prove whether its true or false i mean if its true you follow that line to go further if its false you think where is the problem and where do i go wrong and see try to practice correction loop until you go so it’s a i think it’s a pretty how to say that a the its like a computer programming thing and you whether you tell its idea whether its true or false then what else you can do to further improve it so  : hypotheses and testing it is core of the scientific thinking right that’s what i think : it’s a combination of both, in the early days for example i can break my career in los angeles in say 3 parts, the first part is the morphology or something and second part is in the company and the third part is further here in the first stage i'm more of a hands on person so i do lots of experiments, lots of experiment and then you carefully observe the experiment and collecting with the results you develop your understanding of the field then to the second stage that’s i supervise lots of people young kids and based on experiment i guide them to go what direction i'm making devices you to product those things the third stage for me is also guiding students and pump them with new ideas and discuss with them so that i work and but in the third stage for me is i worked with under (? around 3:40) young in material science yeah we i mean i provide instill the students how to test okay and ask for the feedback what's the going on in your experiment or without rather than i do the experiment enough that if you take a look of the loop thing whether its true or false and where to go that’s similar process  : you kind of have some sense : one is the working ethic attitude i mean know in our field hard work and also smart thinking are both very important hard work including you read papers and try to build your own logic in understanding in the field the second thing is you do experiment there are many experimental details and you also want to put really put your not only your time but also your mind into it and some people sometimes you can see people become a little bit sloppy oh i just automatically this one do a test in i tell you okay i test this is it something else and for some people they think more and they will from the experimental details they try to derive the i think its critical thinking or and they that’s they want to train themselves to rather than just to say the boss give me a task i think i'm done you know that’s so successful or not i think that’s attitude and your true willingness to train yourself that’s very important of course that’s we are lucky that in ucla every kid is very smart so we would get rid of that not smart or something : yeah of course  : um of course that i mean we go through colleges we go through graduate schools you have phd advisors and postdoc advisors and during the work you develop something you learn from the external world rather than i mean other addition to what you are learning in school they all play significant roles one that i think mostly influential will be my postdoc advisor professor young [mentor 1] here and i mean for me it’s a big change in research direction you think about it its light emitting diode you get electricity to light and solar cell is you get a light electricity out it is opposite its direction and also while i was doing phd doing what do we do evaporation process and here is the solution process so that lots of things change and the most i think the biggest influence is i mean how do you find that direction that’s worth pursuing or using i mean having an impact on it young's style he's not a one that to say wow i need a thousand papers or something right i want my papers to be say impact my work to have impact so in other words that’s many research there are many interesting research there try to find the one that fits you think important so i'm more less i think more less that’s follow the things that i mean learn from him and also develop my own source because personality wise there are very different from him but in research things i think that we all agree that if i want to do some research i want this research to have potential impact to the society or to the technology yeah : good question that’s also ongoing process in the early days for me its i mean in i just came to united ucla of course young to say well we want to go this direction i mean by the way he is formerly he is formerly also doing light emitting devices there right and since that time when he see the organic light in diode research more less goes more towards industry or its very interesting that see when you see that research go to industry some people think well i should jump in to it and some people think well okay because of the way of research there is probably too much towards application then in the united in the university its probably how to say its probably think about you do something different  : yeah so that’s i think  : laughs interesting : okay well i see its different people have different talents of course your friend surely very smart so in the force okay lets go back into 2004  where i came the groups that’s do try to do solar cell i mean for the group is more less starting from scratch but i think it’s a reason to see that one is say its interesting that if you can solar cell process in is more is a like a semiconductor making chips or that type right it’s a starting point for me its like okay well there bars of words of printed solar cells there right but the performance is too poor okay what can we do there i mean when those things are poor i mean some people think its bright side simple some people think its dark side right so that’s optimize say optimist people saying well there bigger room of changing it and fortunately we i mean our hard work that pays off and we can do something there so the first stage more or less i think its beginning it’s a learning process i develop i mean there once that you can do some cool things build up like of confidence and of thinking  about things there and actually in that period we also i come out an idea of saying getting the device's structure people typically just viewed it this way well i said how about view it flipped i mean we flip it actually that’s nowadays a big important concept for the field because in that way that we get rid of reactive metals and its make the step a little  of the device much better before and later that there are minimal people follow that line they even showed that the efficiency performance can be even better wow that’s amazing for me  : flipping it okay well say its actually okay formerly we talk about so called we call it the active layer or say the light shining on it separate charge or something right but extraction of the charge is you  also have so called interface between your semiconductor polymers and your electrodes which are basically any kind of conducting material could be transparent conductor or transparent oxides could be like metals or aluminum or something there right and the typically people do is the classical one would be still widely used was its called indian oxide and this material has like a work function larger work function that a close to like 4... sorry i go a little about into technical side say high work function somehow high work function so when people build it naturally think i get a high work function buffer layer or that layer on top they should've flow i mean the charges extracting should've flow smoothly onto it okay and then build it on the other side you get a low work function, high and a low is kind of a for this devices you need an asymmetric contacts so one is higher another is lower to like its like you have a direction to extract those things right so well to assure that people that just say its high work function so i see it put a high work function interface layer on top and then build it this way and then we find out that i read papers and i found something that’s okay when we people doing o letter research light emitting diode research there are few reports in seeing well that’s why i can actually use some interconnections some materials and modify the work function i put it on and convergent into a low work function thing and the material is stable and then its and typically one big problem for a low work function metal electrodes in the field is i mean examples are calcium we all know when you put a piece of shiny calcium into the air what happens right it becomes white it becomes white that thing is a big problem for the lifetime of the device so but this materials that there are materials that you can use that to modify the surface work function to lower it and make it a low work function contact then on the top you can use other metals higher stable and higher work function material for the other contacts so i say why don’t we try this once well we used to spend quite a bit of time to figure out what's the appropriate ones for the bottom one and the top one  : that’s from i mean of course it has a continued i was doing o lead research before  : okay that’s pretty new to me  : wow hard for me to understand  : i think i have actually a mixture of this but more on the openness and the questionable side personality wise i'm more mild person so i typically do not want to confront i mean debating with you or something i do think the things i might share my thinking of say whether its paper or this month presentation i tend to discuss those things with the student tell the student ask them say where is the problem on that one and you guess when you do research to think about it or say that after the thing after the persons presentation i mean we can discuss after you rather than i mean when you finish when this one finish i ask questions that’s not the style i'm going after and critical thing about reads the paper and criticize well or think about where is the weakness or strength weakness and where we can learn and where are the things that are clearly that have a problem that’s always a very important process for scientific research i mean of course many times its particularly those papers that you publish say quote high impacted journals or something you need to study hard and see that what are the things that they do right what they do wrong and where are the things you can improve that’s always a process for my me as a researcher and also discussion with the people there yeah  : um that’s what we call brainstorming with people right and there are other way of think now i think of some ideas potential and i write it down and later i see something else i write it down something some of the times those ideas are unrelated ideas you might pursue as different projects go and sometimes that’s usually well i think there's a key problem into i mean what i say if for example is one to be really useful rather than just publish papers they need to solve whatever problems there and they're typically key things will you need multiple approaches to some help this direction some help that direction those are i mean i try to keep a say always keep thinking of ideas sometimes i, i think idea and leave it there think another idea leave it there it happens a few times that when these are accumulated thinking continuous thinking together some of the times that you can find a better solution those are the things that can make i think more important than a single idea that seems to me some i mean in short its i get ideas sometimes i forgot it but later its pops up with another idea that seems going well  : i would say that both things will happen because its in our field is also we in any quote hot field or something its worldwide competition so that’s you cant get out something first to it’s a product from i mean paper for example or patents those are products right i think that should be a combination of both i mean big ideas are typically not easy to its not a everyday or every month thing everyone knows that so that we should also allow say that even if the work is not totally mature i mean you can still publish it and discuss with the field still contribution to the field so its also related to the resources including the students that how many students or people are working on your ideas for the since that i can see that publishable for example for us lots of people involved if its i can think of an idea well i can see this clearly that has a possibility of some part of get some work and publishable probably pursue that one and for some say for more important say not mature but would be more important than the works stays longer and get it more solid is also important so typically for from my experience it’s a combinations quote smaller papers with hopefully good bigger papers out and it’s a combination  : umm somehow for my experiences its probably for more to the first category of getting the how to say get an idea and try to catch as quick as possible because i mean not every idea that you think will work its also like i mean you try this way you think first you first thing typically i would do is to think whether logically this one makes sense scientifically right had to do something and to see whether my hypothesis works or not and every correction every loop of this one takes time so that's : its college you know you read other peoples work and you i mean for us for example in what you call organic solar cells field we are fortunate we enter this one its probably not the right time because we enter it and we cant do a contribution recognizable contribution it and all the way along that we have been in the front of this its also i mean we have our approach of do it and sometimes if you are lets say you are always in the front for certain time you become sloppy but they try to say resist that things so you learn from the others and those are including some of the research direction will change it to unfamiliar places what do we call it that you leave your comfort zone and this is a its actually become your source collide with other people you call collaborators or something try to generate something different yeah one thing is for example that we do that’s more recently like last year we publish a paper on electro photonics that idea is actually since like i mean it start with a very common source that they have this polymer this material that material they cover different absorption position right you think there is a possibility to put them together or absorb more you probably get a better device but this actually not true lots of failures on that one and what my i mean many people doing experiment will just go say okay i guess that material have many material have combine them doing something right but my thought on that was start from understanding the molecule of packing there right and we i mentioned before that we do so called greasing incident xrd x-ray diffraction those things are pretty fancy equipment will give you lots of information molecules packing and with my early work that we know some molecules pack them like this stack them some things are stacked like that and so instead of the absorption i combined them what i thought is okay well the students struggled a lot that’s about the time i came back from industry to ucla my thought is i mean there when you blend multiple material systems together you could have big impact from their molecule of packing thing there so i tell the students okay now you get a bunch of materials we know we have a pool of materials there and some of the packing this with some packing this with way should test if one is this way another one is this way what happens there and what happens if you have the since both packing this way there and then eventually you can also packing things this way and this way and see what happens there and this including quite a bit of collaboration with our collaborators in national lab because they have the tool device only tells you in this research device tells you a small amount of the thing whether its good or not so that’s the starting point of it and we do find out that the packing thing well similar things that’s packed together will that multiple material into it if you packing similarly they actually give you better performance and its become a key perimeter that’s also a reason that although there are there has been many quite of bit of publications blending things together and this is result or something has been quite a few years people doing that one report something so even if that one we because we solve the problem in the deeper i would call it a different way of thinking it so that’s why we still get it manage to have it published in nature photonics which is a good journal for our field so.  : i know it’s a little complicated but virtually every scientific field you  : okay. yeah, i saw it. : uh huh. : oh um, well there are a couple of theorems i proved so one was, um – i mean, one is called the triangulation conjecture, and that was a few years ago. that was, um - i didn’t think about it too long, i mean it was kind of a “eureka” moment so it was a short paper, like in a couple months i had it – i mean it took to complete. so, that’s the one that’s most, um, you know, that was most appreciated by mathematicians. but, um, the one that - maybe it’s more personally satisfying is another result about, um, four manifolds and - anyway, bringing something in analysis, turning it into something combinatorial. so, this was a long-term project. it took five years to - i mean, we’re, we're still revising the paper, i mean - so that was - i mean that was very satisfying to read at the end, to finish it.  : yes. : and the fact that i had that idea. i mean that was good, but\ : \um, yeah. but the second one is more long term. and, so, it was - i was happy that, you know, i managed to carry it through.  : okay. : oh okay. um, actually i don’t know if it was just one moment, but still in a relatively short period of time. so, i was, um, thinking about application - i mean i was developing a theory and i was thinking about, um, what it can be applied to. i mean still pure mathematics applied to some other part of pure mathematics, not to the real world, but i was asking people like, "what are some conjectures that are related - some questions that are related that this might - might be able to approach?" and everyone mentioned this particular problem - the triangulation conjecture. and then - so i started thinking about it, and i realized that my - what i was doing would not be of any help to that, but uh then, you know, i got curious in the problem and i was thinking, what other kind of techniques could possibly be used to solve this - so, given what we know - so this was a problem—i mean it has been around for almost 100 years and people thought about it in the 80s and then they kind of forgot about it—i mean they didn’t think we have some tools, but i mean i was aware of more recent tools so i was putting these tools back together and i realized that by combining some things, you can solve the problem. : yes. : absolutely, yes. that’s how it is. : yes, exactly, yeah. so this was maybe like over a couple days that i realized that it worked—that other things could work, so it wasn’t like one moment. but actually it was a third thing that i did a while ago in 2006 that really was a “eureka” moment. this was my first big result. and that i remember exactly that i just sat in my office and at some point the idea came to me. so that was even more - but in both cases, i mean, it was after thinking about the problem for a while and then…yeah. trying to keep different things in my mind together. interviewer (6): right right. that’s an interesting thing. i don’t think we’ve ever had the opportunity to ask a mathematician about the number of elements that you think you have to maintain active in your mind in order to arrive at one of these insights. there’s—in cognitive psychology, maybe i can back this up for a second—we typically think of the number of bits of information or the number of nodes that are actually needed to maintain—or that we can maintain in mind—there’s a property of fixed capacity of how much information we can maintain in mind. that ability is called working memory capacity; the number of items that can be held in mind. and as you can imagine, the definition of “items” is somewhat controversial. but i’m just wondering…: i don’t have a real answer to this i mean…there’s a lot of mathematics and you kind of have to be aware of all of the—i mean there’s like hundreds of things, but some of them are clearly not going to help, so then you kind of restrict attentions to the ones that are gonna help and then…i don’t know. in the end it’s just usually two things, like one from some area and one from some other area and there’s a connection between them. but it’s kind of a process of elimination and just arriving at the thing that helps. : oh yes. definitely. i write on my notebook. i mean - i mean i also have some things on the back of my mind. right? but lately i—the more i learn, the more i forget, and also i’m getting older so i try to really write down everything and i keep—starting a few years ago, i really try to keep track of everything. i mean, i learn so that i don’t have to think about it later and i can access it easily—i mean in files in my computer. so i write on a tablet and i have it there. : but… yeah. usually i think with a notebook in my hand and i try to scribble, and the calculations… : no, no. actually paper notebook. so usually it’s paper notebook, and if i come up with something, at the end of the day or something, then i transcribe it onto the files. or if someone tells me some interesting idea when i talk to someone—collaborator, or some visitor, then i write it there. otherwise it would be too much. : yes. pictures and symbols—so topology, it’s basically drawing pictures and also doing calculations on the side related to the pictures. sometimes i write some words, but yeah usually it’s pictures and symbols. : i could have brought my notebook…but i… : if there’s any picture, then it has to be two- or three-dimensional. we usually try to represent—i mean there are different ways of kind of simplifying things in higher dimensions and draw them in three or four—sorry, in three or two. but—so some things you can’t, and then you just do calculations of all of them instead of pictures. but i mean yeah, basically we try to simplify things. so sometimes they are also like tables or yeah, how things are related to each other, like diagrams.  : i think i’m more visually inclined. i mean that’s what geometry and topology are about. but i can do the algebraic manipulations too. : oh the long one? : let me see. sure sure.  : no. she only had four years of schooling. yes she grew up in our village in [country 1: where the participant comes from]. but let’s see. right. so…yeah. we’re trying to understand shapes in higher dimensions and we want to be able to say when they are different, so when you cannot deform one into the other. so for example you cannot deform a sphere into a doughnut without crushing it, but in higher dimensions. and there is a technique for doing this, which involves kind of analysis—solving differential equations. that’s a well-established technique but the thing is that there was no algorithmic way of getting the result. there are various tricks for solving this—it’s kind of like integrals and derivatives, calculus. but i mean there’s no—there wasn’t any way of you know, you have your data and you want to put it in a computer and get out the result. so it was just like tricks. so what we did is finding such algorithmic way, so the kind that you can just—i mean it’s algorithmic, you can put it in a computer and it gets the result. so this was the problem.  : yeah, i mean i’m happy to be able to do something long-term. and somehow—i kind of committed myself to it, so, you know, i have to do it. i have to say, it wasn’t as—i was sort of disappointed, it wasn’t as well-received by the community as i had hoped because—so somehow we made everything algorithmic, but algorithms are just incredibly complicated. so no computer can actually work with them. i mean…but they exist. so it’s mostly of a theoretical—it’s mostly a theoretical result. so people—i mean, they wanted to know such an algorithm exists, but ideally they would have wanted to have something that they can actually do in practice and that doesn’t happen. so somehow—but i’m happy that it exists, just on a theoretical level. so i kind of convinced myself that this is good. i mean i put so much work into it that yes, i mean… i’m happy with it. : sure, i mean one thing was when i was an undergrad and i was looking for a professor and i just asked around who—who i should…and some people suggested some names, and i just knocked on someone’s door and he became my advisor. i mean, i was kind of lucky because he was just moving from [university 1] to [university 2] so he didn’t have a lot of other students or anything, so he took me under his wing, so he helped me a lot. he introduced me to topology basically. so that was helpful. : yeah my sophomore year. my second year. i mean there are other events too, i don’t know. wining some math contests when i was in high school, ‘cause that helped me get a scholarship in the us. otherwise it would have been completely different. : oh i see. i mean in [country 1] they are well established, like almost all school kids would do well in school. they go into different subjects, so i was best at math. and then i went to the math olympiads. but basically everyone…i mean, yes. it’s just in all the schools. it’s a well-established network, so kind of all the kids go through that. : they start in sixth grade, so whatever that is. twelve, thirteen… : oh yeah i mean before that…i was kind of studying math on my own. and i liked puzzles—math puzzles, stuff like that. : yeah like in first grade or so, i was doing math puzzles…just…yeah. random things. kind of like completion diagram, like the ones we did today. : yeah. : yeah. : no it was kind of challenging towards the end, but yeah. but i think i got them all.  : okay, we’ll see. : yeah my parents. they were like in newspapers, we had some books with them. yeah maybe a bit later, second or third grade. hmm what did we have? yeah, they were in some magazines. they had these kind of puzzles at the end. : and my uncle too, actually. maybe my uncle was into them and some other kids at school. i guess they were quite popular. : it was under communism, so there weren’t a lot of distractions, so this was like one of the few things that people could do for fun. : i mean it was—it wasn’t part of the [organization 1] but it was in the [session of organization 1]. : yeah, he liked to do puzzles and things like that. we were just playing games. we had—and i don’t know. just playing some… even chess.  i don’t play chess anymore, but yes. : a little bit.  i wasn’t…yeah. i kind of stopped in fourth grade or so. : it depends at what level. so like undergrads who would want to study math or… : i mean to study… maybe one of the major advices is to understand the literature first too because math has been developing for hundreds of years, and somehow what we do in college is calculus which was in the 1600s, so it takes a long time to just absorb what people did in the other—in the 400 years since then. so whereas a lot of students try to make their own mark or solve their own problems, but this is just—somehow they should really focus on observing the math that was—on learning first, and then doing creative stuff. i mean there are some creative outlets like math competitions and so on but it’s really hard in math to make a contribution without first learning a lot of material. : yes. : yes. up to recent… before trying to do new research, i think a good stepping-stone is to be able to read a paper published in a journal like now, like a research paper. and yeah… i dunno. to pursue things that they like most in math. : well it depends how fast everyone is and in a few years… usually it’s until second or third year of graduate school. : i did it faster than that. but i was—i was ambitious. but that’s the average… : no. : i mean it’s probably more than that if you count all the math from first grade on right.  : yes, they should try to specialize somewhat early. i mean, maybe…they should kind of know the math in all the fields like up to the 1940s. i mean they should have a general education of what math was until then, but once they get to that point they should specialize into a subfield. and i mean they can still go to—they can still do some learning on the side about what’s going on in related subfields, but they should really pick something. : no not really. i mean i can tell if they are talented at solving problems, math problems. so that’s helpful, i mean that’s based on tests and how quick they are thinking. that’s helpful, but to succeed you need perseverance; you need grit. so that i can’t tell. : and motivation. that’s—some people are motivated at some point and then they get disenchanted later, so… : yeah. : no. i mean men boast more, they’re more confident in their abilities, i would say. but yeah no, i—when it comes to problem solving, i don’t know. maybe. you should tell me, with the brain… : maybe, but that’s at least how they present themselves. : i mean i guess we don’t talk too much about that. but if anything i do encourage them to have some hobbies outside of math and have a balanced life. i mean definitely—i think many people, when it comes to choosing a position, like a university, i mean not as a student but as a professor, when they get to that stage, i think—i try to tell them to choose mostly based on their personal reasons and some place they would be happy to live rather than the best place for doing math, which is not the advice that most people would give. but i don’t know; that’s my take on it. if they’re happy, then they will do good work.  : yes, yes, yes. although i do think—i mean it’s helpful to be in a good department where you have colleagues to talk to and to provide stimulation. : oh yeah, definitely. i mean i learned a lot from collaborators too—yeah i mean, they teach—we have visitors, we—i try to bring people to help too. that’s very important in math too, to be aware of what other people are thinking, and just learn from them, from other fields, and combine it with your field and…yeah from collaborators for example—i used to have kind of a writer’s block, it took me a long time to write papers. but you know, then i see my collaborators just writing and writing and writing and just writing, so then fine. okay. that’s what we have to do. i learned that from some of them. so i think i have less of a problem now. : i don’t know. over time i learned, for example, that it’s usually hard to start. so once you start it’s not so bad, so i might as well start and then i will be fine. and just do a little kind of, but consistently almost every day rather than…that’s helpful. : no, i do. i do it, yes, as a—i try to go to other seminars. we have a colloquium every week. i don’t go to all of them, but when they are somewhat adjacent to topology i try to go and just listen to what other people say and just to build up some culture about what’s going on in mathematics. and we have the archive paper—there’s an archive online where people post papers and i get it in my email every day and i just look at it and see what’s happening.  : yes that’s definitely helpful—yeah actually, yes. i mean, keeping up with what’s going on. : no.  : no—maybe i’ve heard of him, but i don’t… : i mean i try. sometimes i read things in computer science and in physics but… i guess so far it hasn’t been that hard—well i collaborated with a computer science but on a kind of—his project, he needed some help from a topologist. :  yeah in math i think rationality is more important. i mean i’m kind of systematic and try to get all the pieces together and see what helps and what doesn’t help, but some of it, intuition in the back somewhere working but… yeah for me rationality is more important. : yeah i mean i guess… yes, sure. yeah. maybe it’s just that rationality—i don’t know if it’s more important it just takes more time to work out things than to get a hunch. i mean, yeah i get hunches, but then you have to sit down and see what they… if they are good for anything. : yes, yes absolutely. that’s what the case with this triangulation conjecture when i was trying to find an application for the tool i was developing, but in the end i just started thinking about application and what are the tools i needed for that, and then yeah. i solved it with some completely different tools.  : yes that helps. sometimes i try to do calculations and try to get an idea but it doesn’t work, so then i just step back and then i do some other things and then sometimes it works after i wake up in the morning or… yeah. : yeah, take a shower is good. do some cooking, whatever. read. like exercise actually sometimes… that’s good i think. : more or less, i mean, three times a week. : i have a gym at home, i mean a small—yeah. gym machine and i run in the park. i kind of alternate between the two. : i sleep quite a lot, except last night. but i don’t know—between 8 and 9 hours. last night i just got 5 for some reason. i don’t know. we had an important meeting today so i was thinking about it…not this one. this one is important too, but…yeah. it was a hiring meeting so i wanted them to pick my person. : yes. : yeah more or less, like 11 to 8. well 11:30 to 8. something like that. : evening.  : actually it’s kind of spread out along the day like morning, afternoon, sometimes late in the evening. yeah i mean…let’s see. so i guess my “eureka” moment kind of came in the afternoon, but maybe the evening is better just to compute things and get some work done. i don’t know.  : i think we covered it, i mean, yeah. just try to get to know as much about the field as possible, and then sit down, concentrate and think about what—do some calculations, see what works, and then if it doesn’t work, just step back, do something else, and then maybe keep it in the back of my mind and then come back and do more calculations. : i definitely prefer sitting and thinking about it, so yeah i still don’t like writing papers for example, but i learned to force myself to do it. i used to take kind of a long time to think about how to phrase things in the most clear way and—but then that was taking me a long time to write papers so i learned from other people that i should really get down to work and doing it. but i’m still procrastinating.  : i don’t know. maybe it’s just hard to—it takes kind of actually a lot of thinking to turn mathematics into—to be able to explain it and to write it down clearly for other people because it’s somehow so abstract and somehow—i mean you don’t want to just write down your calculations ‘cause then it’s hard to read for someone else, so you have to put some words and that’s—that takes quite a fair amount of thinking, but at the same time it’s less rewarding. you already did the work, you solved the problem, but then you have to put all this work into writing it down and it’s just—i try to do something else or think about something new that sounds much more exciting or just take a break. so that’s kind of the main challenge for me. : a little bit, but…well they don’t know how to write as well. i have to teach them how to write so… yeah. but yeah, with post-docs and previous students, sometimes we collaborate. but i also would feel bad to give them all the—i mean nobody really likes to write; everyone likes to think instead of writing pretty much. i mean, there might be some exceptions…so i would feel bad if i give them just all this work.  : i think i can focus on specific problems at a time but i also like to learn a lot so i try to keep a balance between them. i mean compared to other people in my area i would say i am more on the breadth. maybe. at least i do more connections with related areas rather than just focus on kind of one theme. but i do—i’m also into problem solving just one particular problem and just going (? 40:05) even if it’s technical so i kind of maintain a balance… : no no no. there are parts—there are times when it’s about learning. that’s more when you want to find some new ideas and when you want to explore. but then once you get down to solving the problem you have to focus. so yeah, it’s at different times in a project. : no. : interesting. i don’t know…inhibit, inhibit. the habitual. i mean…i don’t know. you have to try to look at new ways of approaching a problem if you get stuck. i mean there’s just a number of techniques that people know in a particular field and you have to be aware of them, and then see which one can be applied. and sometimes the most likely one is not the correct one, so you have to think about the others. yeah. i don’t know what to say. : well i think i had more energy when i was younger. i was staying up at night, now i have administrative duties during the day so i’m kind of tired at night so i just try to research whenever i have time. yeah i have to be more efficient, but i also have experience so the productivity increases. and the thing with the writing, i think i’m better with it now than i used to be so i kind of discipline myself. although—i guess i became more careful. i used to not be as careful but then the mistakes came back to haunt me; if there was some things i didn’t quite write clearly in a paper then later my students were asking me about them and then i had to go back so that’s really annoying so i just…you know, i really have to figure everything out when i write a paper. so i think i learned to pay more attention to carefulness. oh and actually the major change was keeping track of what i think and writing it down on the computer and keeping track of the files. this i did maybe a few years ago ‘cause i was forgetting things and then a year later i had to do the same calculation again for no reason when it was already done. but i couldn’t find the notebook where i had to look for it so now i’m much more organized ‘cause there’s like more things that have accumulated over time. : just be curious, spend time learning things…yeah. don’t just focus on one thing…that’s the main thing. and to be ambitious; if a problem is not solved by others, doesn’t mean—maybe some new tools have been developed—of course don’t spend all your time on something that has a very low probability of success, but do try to think about hard problems.  : uh huh i think i've heard the name  : that’s always the question that gets me... 'cause nowadays you don’t get to come up with one great discovery like previously right, but i guess we understand the world, physics, materials, we understand the world, we know the equations. so, nowadays, we try to apply them and solve them and come up with new things we haven’t been able to do before. so, i guess it’s a discovery on the computer. we proposed that a certain material will be very good, it's called a thermoelectric. there's a company in the [region 1] is using it as the first commercial product of its kind… so that’s kind of cool, haven't seen any money from the patenting office yet - we licensed the patent so should start seeing it sometime : more like air conditioning  interviewer: oh i see, well congratulations. now what is it about that particular discovery or invention that gives you pride? when we had to initially define creativity so we could subject it to some scientific study and we looked at other definitions and creativity is almost always defined as is two factors one of which is novelty or the product and another is the utility of the products. so things must be novel and useful to be considered  creative but obviously products vary in both mentions. so i'm just wondering..: it’s useful because you can use it to generate electricity from exhaust heat, which you know hopefully makes the world a slightly better place. its unexpected because the material is from rock which you can dig from the earth which no one thought for thermoelectricity :  well we calculated a bunch of things about it we got an idea that it should be a good thermoelectric based on some rules of thumb, then we calculated its properties and they worked out and we suggested to our experimental collaborators they should synthesize it and it worked… the rock is called tetrohedride… it’s a dark shiny rock, you wouldn't tell it from any other rock it is most abundant sulfosalt, has a lot of copper in it, it’s not expensive there's a lot of it… : i'm not really sure  in the end might as well take copper sodium ammonium and mix together… it’s a mineral, it's easy to synthesize b/c very stable : professionally, personally? : i’ve kind of forgotten about the obstacles. you look at a problem and you decided if you can solve it or not. if you can, you look at it really hard and eventually the solution comes. if you can’t, you stop looking at it you forget about it and move on :...sometimes after a few weeks  you can go pretty far thinking and reading about it before you decide  oh sorry i can't solve this this is too complex. but it’s very important to move on, if something is not working, just you know cut the losses and move on : no, i don’t think so. i think i’ve always wanted to do what i’m doing. i started doing it before grad school when i was an undergrad. : they had – when i was in high school actually – a program for kids to “do research”, you know whatever research we can do, but it was a very successful program that pulled a lot of kids into doing physics research.  it was organized by an institution back in my home country in [country 1], [institute 1] and you got to try out things in the lab and try to work on stuff and find what you like/what your propensities were. i guess that’s what kind of pulled me in. :  yeah. from then on it was really linear… it certainly wasn’t one day that i woke up and decided to do research  : they had this system for selecting kids from competitions in math and physics then they selected you for their brainwashing so to speak  : so i would say they would select the winners of the physics competitions maybe 10-20 people every year : yeah which is a nation of two million people it isn't really two and a half.. : i don’t know, no. i thought it was pretty cool to be in the physics competition but i was kind of oh yeah cool i mean i get to hang out with real scientists… : no yeah i know it in what sense? : yeah i was probably annoyingly smart.  : well i could play chess, i could recite any chess game i ever saw i mean… now i cant do those things anymore my memory is gone… but  you know as a kid i think i until the age of 20-something i really could remember everything. : no it was never photographic it was more logical… i could read a text but i don’t think my memory was particularly special… like in chess, every move has  a logic to it that what makes it easy to remember : well they didn't quite overlap but i mean a few good games by [person 1] i could remember… not sure if [playing chess] really helps but who knows : i don’t think they ever discouraged me or particularly encouraged me… i was pretty much left to my own devices. : middle school elementary school? nah. i thought the teachers were silly. they always taught to the common denominator and i was bored out of my skull. so i usually just skipped classes i didn’t like. : on the us scale, probably 3.6. i always joke i probably wouldn’t have been admitted to [college 1]. probably the same for you too right  : actually we had entrance tests not standardized tests. physics, math, composition, and –for some reason i think it’s four but i can only remember three. and they were very easy – physics and math... for someone who had gone to these competitions and trained for them… those tests they were very easy. my mother wanted me to be a doctor but i always hated chemistry, and i think that’s because my high school teacher sucked. it didn't make a lot of sense to me.  but what i do now is a lot of chemistry. : i think [the teacher] just had no idea what she was talking about basically it just didn’t make any sense. : same thing here...  once you have a phd in theoretical physics then things start to make sense. there are teachers that manage to teach chemistry in a way that people understand and like… we just didn’t have that. : there was a guy i wouldn't really call him a mentor... when i was an undergrad, yes. i worked him at [institute 1] for physics. he was always in the same field i was… computational, material science. but then i left the country and i did my phd actually in [country 2]. : it was ok. i liked it. i like the us a lot better, i thought it’s a lot more of an open society, [country 2] is set in its own ways but it’s a nice country. cozy. : i'm disappointed i always thought i was an extremely agreeable person (both laugh) : oh i never believe anybody. i always have to figure it out on your own. if it makes sense when you’re trying to figure it out sure yeah, but in general, no… : well you have to for somethings you can't just question everything when it comes to your work or important decisions, you do have to reexamine everything, but there are just too many important decisions to apply that equally  everything in your life. you’ll go crazy. : sure. yeah. it’s really nice when you have talented students. when they actually...  you learn things from them. : high standards, good ideas, ability to tell good ideas from just … ones. : how do i do that? : it makes sense. : yeah but like it makes real sense. it sort of solves something that you didn’t understand before i think. like usually it’s something like looking at things from a new angle, applying a new technique so you see things you haven’t seen before and so you learn more about stuff. : when they come in as grad students? : i wish i could. no, to be honest, i don’t think you can. it’s hard, i think. : well we only get a very small sampling of range of features available in the world, right? all people who entered grad school have been good undergrads, have shown good propensity to do research, they're all pretty similar…  the differences are really miniscule... it's not the highest gpa, in fact, i find its almost negatively correlated with research achievement. it’s just the ability to do stuff on their own and be interested in it. i’ve had people with gpa you know 4.0 and they dropped out in the first half a year. : i think they just like doing stuff on their own. they just enjoy the process of doing it. they do it because they enjoy it not because they want to make the world a better place, or to advance research/their career. i think they just like it. : pretty much the same. it makes the time pass pretty fast and you get a sense of satisfaction. : it’s kind of a flow i mean… your brain is working at its maximum capacity… i'm not sure i never thought too much about the state of flow. : no i don’t think so. it has to be an interesting task, you can’t get into  flow say by writing an annual report for my projects i'm not getting in a flow there : i know i was just heading a search committee [chancellor 1] is really making life difficult  : he's a lawyer right? : everything has to go through that guy everything : anway we're near the end : its very appropriate i noticed that they’ve been very successful at that : well my mother was an engineer, my father was an engineer… i guess it’s in the genes or i don’t know. genetic? environment? : i had a sister… she actually also became an engineer. but she wasn’t like that interested in science or anything, she just wanted to be an engineer and have a job and family and stuff. so she i guess did not want to spend late evenings writing proposals… of course i didn’t want to either, but… [once you get into it] there’s no way out. : i read a lot : both literature, popular science, science fiction, history… pretty much everything that was in the house. i played games, sports games… i used to swim for a couple of years… once i started playing chess i would just play things like soccer and... what else…i would tinker with stuff a little bit. i had one of those things –a constructor – you have all kinds of electrical things, motors… i’m sure its outlawed in the us b/c you can shock yourself… and you can make stuff out of it. and of course an electrical motor is a source of endless fascination for a kid… when you’re 6-7 years old…you kind of figure out how things work... you disassemble it and look at all the wires... although you don’t quite understand how they work but they do work the way they do… but now stuff has gotten so complicated you can't really do that e.g. you can't take apart your computer… but you can take apart an old radio set... you wouldn’t be any wiser if you took a look inside, it’s all chips… you could take apart a radio and replace some transistors/bulbs and it would still work. : intuition is very important. you have to have an idea of why things happen the way they happen before you do the calculation… because let me say this you have to calculate something, and there’s about a zillion diff things you can calculate and if you just shoot around you’re not going to be very successful. you have to have a hypothesis e.g. what makes this material good for solar cells… you have an idea okay maybe it has a high mobility so you go calculate the mobility … its high you … voila. if it’s low or lower than other materials…. you say what’s going on i did not expect this and you have to start revisiting your assumptions … but you know how things work… you always know what makes one material work better than another…  you have to have a feeling for it but you can't rely on intuition you always have to prove at the end. : i’ve gone to talks on pure math or image processing and they are using methods, mathematical methods that are just ideal for us, so that’s very important. that’s really key. no matter what the problem is you’re trying to solve, someone else has probably faced a similar problem and solved it or maybe not…how to solve it, where to look. : usually when you’re not thinking about it, it falls into place… e.g. in the shower, when you’re running… after swimming  : things just fall into place. brain is working even when you’re not. i really have no idea what's going on there. i’m not sure. : i wish i had a routine. no i don’t. i can sometimes cram, sometimes i can be very organized. i typically don’t let things---like if something needs to be done by a specific date i typically do it, i don’t let things pile up; i find it too stressful. but no, i don’t have a particular routine, although it might be useful but it doesn’t work for me.. one of those ideas that look good on paper but suck in practice. : yeah i love my naps. i swim every day; i do things to keep my brain functional… rest and recreation mostly. i can’t talk about that. : like how many hours? i usually wake up around 7 but sometimes i have to wake up earlier at 6 or 5 or 4… so it's not regular no. : well if i have to catch a flight or a 4:30 – on wednesdays i have an open water swim that starts at 6… that’s a little challenging but i do it because i enjoy it. you just go to bed earlier… or take a nap in your office. 7-8 hours. now and then i can last saturday i napped 2.5 hours. power nap, i was past rem phase : no, that’s nonsense. none of that works. i don’t get ideas either from getting high or drunk, because when you sober up it’s all bull. : i have never really used that many drugs  : i didn’t know spiders could get high  : what did they give them lsd? :  waking hours? well there’s stuff i do like office stuff that’s not really scientific. that probably takes a few hours. pure science… including writing papers, reading papers, talking about papers… with my students… 6 hours. 8 if i’m lucky. 5-8. : i don’t read stuff when i eat… i don’t wanna spoil my appetite or chuck up my food because i get angry because of things people say in papers. why take chances? : yep, [i swim] an hour; two miles [every day]. saturday/sunday can be longer. wednesday morning can be longer too. i’m not much of a fast swimmer; you have to be built differently for speed. the guys who do sprints, they’re different. they’re like big beyond belief… like that shelf : where are am i on the continuum if relevant? i certainly suffer from a perfectionist gene i think… sometimes i think i spend too much time on making things perfect and getting the last dot on the 'i', but overall i think i’m doing all right. you have to be careful with the data and the research that you publish. : countless. : teens. i’ve had a few students who produce such good students right off the bat we barely crack ten. those are exceptions to the general rule. : i’m not a spontaneous person obviously, but that’s not hard to read i suppose. : i don’t do stupid shit sorry… i try not to. i do i try not to : i’m not sure of the twenty-minute variety but sort of like the one day variety, the several days, weeks variety memory… that helps. 20 seconds i’m not sure that’s very useful in my field. : oh yeah. on one hand… and then on the other hand… and on the third hand :  i'm not familiar with that, oh i can’t keep 7 digits in mind, 6 is my limit and even then not for long it's just... : no i couldn't remember at the end he's like numbers and digits... get me out of here i have a cell phone for that : i think it's important to keep ideas in mind and concepts. i don’t see a particular reason for me to keep ideas in mind and numbers and letters…maybe even names but i think... formulas yeah, but you can always look that stuff up. you really need to know that it exists and what it does, you don’t really need to remember all the factors of pi squared you know… but you have to remember and understand each how the concepts and relate i sort of more i think about the memory or framework that links diff things in my mind. so when someone says this i usually think of other things e.g. phenomena over time.  so when somebody says this it usually brings up other associations... other areas other phenomenon's other properties that might be relevant i’m sure that’s changed over time, i’m just compensating for the fact i can't remember stuff. in chess its very well understood when people hit 40, they lose the ability to keep things in the memory and they lose the ability to calculate in advance rapidly it's just a downslope all the way til you know til you kick the bucket but what they can do for about but what they can do for 10-20 years is that they can compensate that with general knowledge of the game and experience and they use other systems for reasoning. so i’m hoping that’s what happening i'm just hoping it's not just the memory is going and there's no upside to that. : i don’t know about that   : i think visualization is very important its makes you sort of see how things work so coming up with a nice graphic or schematic for how things work is very important it helps me both understand and explain to others you know sometimes it's not obvious how to visualize its hard work… it takes 10 iterations sometimes : i’ve always thought about this – whether our minds work by thinking in languages or differently. i kind of have a i don’t know i think it’s kind of both – that part of it is really just spatial, and another part of it is language and logic – but part of it is just – they somehow fit. it’s hard to quantify though exactly what i- it's not like i’m forming complete sentences when i’m thinking and complete correct logical predicates – it just doesn’t work that way. later on when you figure it out how it should be you go on and figure out the sentences you’re going to put on the paper.  : let me think... it’s certainly true the best ideas come when you’re not thinking about them but i’m not the first or the last one to know that. :  oh boy, work wise we're talking about, yeah, not talking about kids. but uh so i think... trying to think where to start and how to make this not too long winded, but i think when i was a practicum student at [hopstial 1] and i started seeing these patients with 22q deletion clinically and i just thought this was such an interesting population and i could've just stopped there and said "okay that's interesting" and go on and do something else, but i was really motivated to basically do a research study of the cognitive profile of these kids and so and then we actually did an almost free imaging study because we were allowed to use the scanner on sundays so i managed to bring all these kids in for imaging and so, and that was, i think i was really, i just was a graduate student, i think i was really sort of surprised that i was able to do all this by myself without really anyone even knowing about it. this was back in the late 90s you know, so and then when i came to [university 1] i think there was a big question of do i do something that's easy which would've been, i mean i'm still very interested in clinical high risk for psychosis but that would've been probably the easiest thing to do, we already had an infrastructure but i really thought about what was going to be the most exciting and interesting thing to do and it was i really wanted to start a cohort of these deletion patients here and really build up this neurogenetic disorders program, so getting that going here was not easy to start out but you know now i feel like it's really expanded and become this international consortium so i feel like it's something that i can look back on and say "oh that was really good that i kind of persevered on this and made it, made it work." : yeah so i think it's being sufficiently interested in something that you feel is worth following through all the details that are needed because it's not interesting at every step of the way, obviously, for anything we do there is some interesting idea and then there's a whole lot of really boring shit you have to do - i'm sorry but just taking that, because you know starting out with just this idea that we really want to characterize this cognitive profile, there was no database there was no irb, there was none of that, and so, so really i think the perseverance, the big part of it, because i think it's great, and i love to have ideas but i think the hard part is really taking that and executing it and once you look at all of the huge list of things you have to do in order to actually pursue that goal it's sometimes overwhelming and sometimes you think "uh maybe it's not worth it" and so i think maybe part of it was just being really naïve when i started it that this was worth doing, and so yeah, i think motivation is a big part of it. : i think it's curiosity, um you just, there's a phenomenon that you see and you observe and then, and for me it was in this context it was seeing these kids that came in, they physically looked very different but they had some of the same behaviors just over and over again and so seeing that you know this specific genetic etiology that can lead to just this behavioral presentation that's so um, homogenous it was really, it was really interesting. and so i think that there was this, yeah i just had this level of curiosity that there's got to be something here that's going to be really important in terms of understanding psychopathology and understanding the roots of cognitive dysfunction.   : yeah, my experience is that it does and i, i feel like a lot of the things that i now feel were really worth doing i might not have done had i known all the things all steps that were going to be involved and how complicated they were going to be and so, so maybe that's going to make me less creative\- end of recording 1 / start of recording 2 - : \something that's not directly related to your field of research. okay, wow. well let's see if i can come up with something, uh, more concrete about this. um … so, i guess i was thinking about this recently, when, you know, for the [challenge 1] that we have now. our economists, who i was hoping, what they would do was boring, and i really wanted to do psychology experiments. that was interesting, and because i really, i really wanted to learn more about economics, and they really wanted to learn about how people, or what i did, and so that was funny. -laughs- yeah so that's just i think an example where i feel like wanted to learning about these other fields, and how they might have formed what i was doing. and i think that, many issues that we have today, for example, genetics, and now dealing with issues like ancestry, and all this genetic architecture, because so much of the work is based on european ancestry. so that is not something that i really like know anything about, but it has presented a huge challenge and so that's actually where we're bringing in population geneticists and all that. this is all very boring, but in any case this has just very clearly open my eyes out to how european-centric all of our data are. in any case i am thinking about that issue a lot. : no. i'm not. i think i have\  : \i have, i have yeah …  and i'm not an extreme evening person, but yeah, i am. : i used to be more extreme but now i am just moderately an evening person.  : yeah, yeah exactly : yeah, yeah! and ….. and john has shifted to the other end, so he's like the extreme morning person. we don’t overlap that much –laughs- : mhm : across species? : across species! : yeah! : -laughs- : yeah! -laughs- : yeah! : well, so the incubation, is not really compatible with the model of promotion that we have, so even if i wanted to live my life that way, i don't think it'd work for this kind of job. : sadly, no! that's really unfortunate, but no. we're like poor texan farmers, so god, none of that. but yeah, well, i think it's interesting, and it's actually encouraging to me, because i feel like that i published a lot of stuff, and most of the stuff is just total crap. and usually not stuff that's from my lab, but really, i feel that i take a lot more time on those things, and i feel good about them, and proud of them. there's just a lot of nonsense, like things i'm co-author on, but anyway, that just goes out. but it is - there may be, and maybe if there is just, if you are throwing more things against the wall, there is more possibility of hitting as opposed to if you only get one shot, you know, that you miss. so i don't...yeah, i don't know, but for me, having certain things that well, the people that i seen had the hardest time in academia are people who are really perfectionists. and so that is why, i think, and that's interesting because that is a quality that i have seen in a lot of students, tend to be more women, where they get so mired in the details and lose track of the big picture. and i've seen people who are excellent at certain things, much better than i am at certain things, and, but really get stuck in the mud just because they are being super perfectionist.  i feel like i have generally high standards, but i am not a perfectionist. and sometimes i do feel like we just gotta get this out there, and see what happens! so, i think that's something, that's a hard balance for me. like is this good enough for other people to see it. but at a certain point, i feel like there's a big difference that has a lower threshold of who's going to see it than something in terms of who's going to see it as opposed to a really good journal that you know more pressure, and that's actually much harder for me to write. so i do think that thinking about who my audience is sometimes a problem for me.  interviewer (7): yeah of course. another theme that we focus on is working memory. a lot of studies have found that greater working memory tend to be correlated to greater achievement. and so that's also true, and the speculation is that the ability to keep the things in mind, and constantly updating it, is part of being creative and coming up with ideas from multiple standpoints. so what do you think about that?: i don't know! so do you mean that working memory has letter numbering sequences and because i feel like i suck at that. -laughs- so i don't know : yeah, yeah yeah! i'm scared! yeah, no. i. it might be. so i certainly wouldn't say...but i do think. i can certainly see how it could be true for certain people, and but at the same time, i mean i certainly find myself being very distracted. so i think that it might help to have something sit right in front of you, but i certainly think that there is one subgroup of people that was creative and really able to do that. and that is, and in terms of how you measure multitasking. i really do think there is a cognitive of multitasking aspect that's really important, but i'm not sure how well one of those measures actually gets at that. : uh huh : so this within between network connectivity?  : mhm : and so the big c people are like the people...? : -laughs- : yeah, that does not....i think my brain is totally interconnected... : in ways that i don't think may be inappropriate...-laughs- : uh huh : -laughs- : -laughs- : -laughs-: nothing? : nothing is touching...-laughs- : -laughs- yeah : i could see that! : who knows if it's true, but i do feel like there is a lot of interconnected processes that go on but i don't know if that interferes with my ability to do like a standard working memory task?: as an excuse, that i am just not good at it. but i think my long-term memory is pretty okay : yeah so, so, so um, yeah. that's... i don't know, i think, but, and sometimes. : i sometimes think it's helpful when i hear something and it reminds me of some other thing, that they will say oh those two things are in totally different context: i think in that way, i think that's how it works for me. as for number sequencing i don't know anything about that. : mm : i'm not good at that either! : yeah : oh, yeah : i think, the habit issue, being able to inhibit something that is a habit, just you know, that totally automated thing, that does, i do feel like that is important to me. and i would like to do more of that! you know, because it is really fascinating, when you are just on this autopilot thing, and you are driving, and you totally forgot that you are supposed to go somewhere different, and you are just like what the hell am i doing? so you know, like what was i thinking? what was happening in my brain? so things like that i feel like, being able to override this autopilot is very important. but i don't know how you are going to be able to measure that???? because i feel like the things like the stop signals, i don't think i am good at, but i also don't feel like that is measuring something that is important : yeah! : yeah how do they do that? : uh huh : okay, okay : what was that test? : did i do that one? : sure! : oh! i can have those? : nice, nice! that's awesome! : right, right, so i can look at it and know what i am doing when you were asking me about all those different uses for stuff : yeah : -laughs- no : cool! : yeah so i can compare it to my later : uh huh : sure!: it'll be probably uninformative from my stance, but you know : i don't know! maybe!!: yeah so : well, [inspiring person 1] was my mentor in graduate school, so no …. : you know i think i had some basic ideas on how to write an irb and things like that....so in terms of....i did have... i also was working with [inspiring person 2], neuropsychologist there, and he was pretty encouraging that this was a good idea just working with these patients clinically. so when i suggested it to him, he was like, "sure!" so people were generally supportive. and thought it would be a good idea, and a group of clinical geneticists there who thought there was a lot of data and information that was utilized they weren't mentors so they were very enthusiastic about running with it and pursuing it. so there was that combination as well as the families, who were so excited that we were doing this study, that we were bringing a drive up to dc from where we were - and the kids do this mri scan and i felt like that was a pretty unique situation as a graduate student to run this whole study and um, there were certainly times where i felt like, "maybe i'm unqualified to be doing this?" but overall it all worked out, nothing went wrong. and yeah, we were able to publish the papers, and i think you know, trying and thinking about the role model issue, and you know, at the time, and since then, subsequently, i have had some fabulous mentors and role models. but i think at the time, i was just going at on this on my own, just kind of following and seeing what was interesting to me and being supportive of it. : that was really had been a lot of it! and as a graduate student i have been working with [inspiring person 1] on this data base on genelogical work, which was fine, but i felt like i was missing something directly, that i was creating, or that i was really directly my work, and not just looking at a bunch of data that has been previously collected and then so that would be very straightforward to do that for my dissertation. but, i felt like it was more compelling to me, and that was the thing that got me excited even though that was going to take me a lot more work : yeah! so since when i came to [university 1], [inspiring person 3] was one of the very first people i met. and what i really appreciated about nelson was his just when i talked to him about my idea on a large-scale study on bipolar disorder, and all the relatives, and doing imaging, all the stuff that he didn’t have an interest in, but he really thought that it was a great idea, and also, i think part of what i appreciated and respected about his mentorship is that he didn't want me to go and do exactly what he did. what he wanted me to do was to encourage me to think about these things that i 'd like to do and figure out how to do it. so i guess it's kind of like a common theme here. and so we just, i 've just really enjoyed working with him, and i think that he just really appreciates the things that i know something about, and we have been able to continue to work together in that setting, and where i have had, when i had an "okay" word here, just really giving me the freedom to explore what i felt the most interested in, and really present to me as "what do you want to get out of it", and not like "here, i'm gonna hand you a project that i want you to do". and that's really the way i like to work, and i really think that it's very helpful. and then [inspiring person 4] is someone who i really look up to, the funny and confidential story about this is that she was in my dissertation committee when i was at [university 2], but there was a falling out with [inspiring person 1] so i had to take her out. so i never, so she could have been a mentor for me for a few years in graduate school! but that didn't quite work out! and so subsequently, in any case, since then, we have reconnected, and have been working together for other works. so she's just someone who i see as a woman who has really gotten - overcome a lot of obstacles and just has constant energy and just really able to make things work. so that's just something that i just really respect about her. : hm, i'm not sure that i've really overcome everything yet, but uh for me, i think a lot of my obstacles are really internal. really just in terms of me feeling confident about my ability to do something or my ability to understand something and so i think it' s more that then that i've had anyone particularly standing in my way. i mean i do, i think that when i came here, i was very, in 2002, i was very naive about how the whole system worked and you know being promoted and all these things and i think that i did not have a lot of guidance on that whole process. i could have asked for more and i guess i also want to mention [inspiring person 5] as someone who was you know, just so helpful for me as a personal life mentor and someone who i felt like i could really talk to about just work-life balance and that kind of thing. so, these are people i kind of met along the way and found to be really helpful, but i did come here feeling a little bit lost about the whole process and what i needed to do and um, i did have this sense at one point, like what if this is just too hard, and you know just in terms of the whole process of getting these grants and getting to the next stage and, and then yeah. some of it is just luck and then you get to a point where you feel a little more solid and you know i think, yet again, i think now a big obstacle for me is, and when i say obstacle it's just in terms of really you know making some major discovery or just doing something that's like a little bit or maybe a lot more creative than what i've been doing. i think that you get to a point - i'm sure you can relate to this - where there's just so many things to manage and just your everyday just trying to put out these fires and get to the next deadline and the whole - so i think what's really hard, thinking about my obstacles right now, what's really hard is just being able to take a step back and think about what it's like to think about the big picture and where i really want to go, and where i want things to be in five or ten years, and so, and i think that getting so caught up in the day to day, i don't; want to say minutia because some of the things are really important, but just all the day to day demands, i do feel like it's really challenging to sort of get ahead of that and think about you know being more mindful about where, what's it all for. : -laugh-. take some time off, i don't know. um. : yeah well, it is really helpful i think to get out of a particular environment and sometimes you think well "why can't i just think differently and be in the same place" but there's something about it where you sort of get stuck in a rut or routine and so i do feel like the times when and i've usually, i felt like "oh no everything is going to fall apart" and "i can't keep up with my emails" and i've always felt like it is really helpful just to be in a different place and talk to my family and um just be out of, stop looking at my computer for a little bit. so i don't know that i'm going to overcome it and, per say, but i do think that taking just stepping out of the normal setting is really helpful and sometimes i just have to force myself to do that.  : whew, don't do it –laughs-. no, um\ : that's right. : yeah, so if you can conceivably do something else and be just as happy then maybe you should do that because it is you know, it's hard. i can't see me now, seeing people some of my students who have gone into technology or whatever, different kinds of jobs. i feel like its equally as demanding and stressful and maybe more so because its so fast paced, so i don’t know if you're unless you're going to work on a farm i don't know that there's a way to really get away from that because a lot of these jobs that -  i actually feel like academia is a little bit slower paced in some ways and so you have a little more breathing room to think about ideas even if i don't personally feel like that i can appreciate it from the distance - we have pretty good jobs. so that's one thing. umm just i think, i think gratitude is one of these things that i've also been thinking about. it's just- i feel like i can get really in details and i can always find something to complain about but then really gratitude for just everything that we have in a way is something that i really try to, and that's another thing that i think when i try to take a step back it's one of the things that i think about. so, yeah i might have lost a little track of that- so going back to what i tell people. i tell people about what i think are the great things what i really like about my job, and then i also tell them the things that i think are really hard and just say "look these are the things you're going to have to deal with" and a lot of times- i also will relate stories about how i felt completely unprepared when i came in for a faculty job and i didn't know anything about writing grants or budgets or just all of these things that you know are sort of, you just spend all your time doing things you weren't trained to do. so that's another thing i tell people, and so you know you figure it out, but it's always helpful to have more guidance and so i just let them know that i, really do want to be a supportive mentor for students and make sure that they feel like they're supported. um but at the same time for people who if they're really on the fence about whether this is academic career is something they want, then i kind of suggest that maybe they should look at other options. : um i like to say- not with, i wouldn’t even say with ninety percent certainty but i think i have pretty good sense and it's, it's not a lot of people. - end of recording 3 / start of recording 4 - : oh clever, so it's working? : yeah so well one other thing is i feel like things have gotten so much more competitive now and just from the level of high school to college to every single level, internship, you know. i don't think when i was for example applying to internship it never occurred to me that oh i wouldn’t get my first choice or that kind of thing and i can just go where i want to go for a post doc and i feel like it's very, things have changed where it's it is, it's much more competitive so that's something i have to balance when i give people advice is just "back in the old days it was all super easy" but you know, i think that, i think that things have gotten more challenging, and so it's another thing to be aware of i just, honestly i don't know how sustainable it is because not everybody who gets to work can get a job, it's just all these silly thing just about funding or just the number, the sheer number of positions that are available for people, i don't know how to advise people about that.  : yeah. i've thought about this a lot because i think creativity is like one thing that's really important, um having really good ideas, uh but execution is probably more important um just because i see people, i see people who are very successful who are maybe not the most creative people and i don't, i don't think i'm the most creative person, and some people who are very successful who are just really good are good leaders, are good clear speakers who are just really well organized and i think that and are very detail oriented and really stick to what they're doing and i think that is one path to being successful in, i mean i'm thinking about academia, it's probably not a path to being successful as an artist, but i don't know maybe it could be but i think um - so i think that is a path whereas i think i've seen people who were incredibly creative and brilliant who may be not so successful because of issues of not being able to get along with people very well or um you know being too demanding or just not following through with things. and so, so i think that it's, it's a combination but overall, i think that this is one of those areas where just showing up –laughs- is important and so, yeah. : oh yeah! yeah. well i think um men are much more on the at least some of them, much more on the idea and not the execution side. i feel like, there's also a big difference in the thing that i've observed the most difference is just how much administration men are willing to do and so i think it's much more common, i don't want to generalize about everybody, but it's much more common for men to say "i'm not going to deal with this, i'm not going to respond to emails i'm going to focus on my science and ignore all this stuff and not be on this committee and not show up to this meeting on time" and for women i think it's a lot less, it's viewed as less acceptable and also i think personally i don't feel like i wouldn't feel comfortable saying no about being on committees or things like that. and i feel like, its much more of a struggle for me to figure out that balance and um you know just being conscientious but not over doing it where i'm just agreeing to be on everything and that i don't have time for self, so there i do think there is a difference.  : yeah tell me if it does : i would say women are much more eager to please and to get along with people and cooperation, i think cooperation is a stronger impulse for women than it is for men for the most part.  : i mean you could go back to some evolutionary explanation, right? of you know the women were the ones taking care of the kids and the men were out there spearing things, so.  : whatever it is they do with their sticks –laughs-. : personal influences in my life? : yeah well so personally i think um i mean [spouse], my partner, is a great help in terms of he's someone i can bounce ideas off of and he's, he's very smart and sometimes i will have an idea that he thinks is ridiculous but you know we usually will talk about it and i actually, every time when we, it's hard to even find time to do that with just talking about dentist appointments and what not but when we do i, it's so helpful and so and it really it just gives the feeling that wow we really need more time to sit down and talk about ideas, that would be really nice. yeah and then friends, i've actually had a lot of great discussions with the students and post docs, people that i've worked with and uh continue to work with and so i think that's always a nice opportunity to just throw out ideas and sometimes when i'm trying to come up with an idea for a student to work on then, i'm a lot more probably creative in terms of suggesting directions for them to go down and just brainstorming about oh well you could try this or you could try this other thing and so i think that's actually a way in which is really helpful for me. [colleague 1] is a great - is a friend and also someone who i feel like i always learned so much when i talked to her and is just really you know, i feel like we have a good connection in terms of really thinking about things in a similar way but she obviously has a much more statistical way of framing things which is really helpful in terms of organizing my thought process so every time when i have a new grant or something then she's really the first person that i think of who i want to show to and just see if it makes any sense.  : oh, i love to give my family no credit but you know to be fair um yeah, it's interesting. i mean my mom is a social worker and my dad is a physicist and so you know its kind of i guess i was interested in i mean he didn't do anything related to the brain but i think i was interested in something related to that was helping people but at the same time scientific and so it seems to make perfect sense even though i never explicitly thought about that ever so yeah. : yeah -laughs- : yeah, i think, so i think reading and scientific presentations at this point are probably a lot of where i will get at least a seed of an idea if this is something that we should pursue. um, in terms of, i mean, sometimes i will have a thought that's not really supported by anything and will just be "oh i think it will be really interesting to do this" and then we'll try to find other people who have done something remotely similar and you know and try to see if there's any like how we could do this, is there some methodology. um, but yeah, i think for example, just now, right before this i was at this developmental neurogenetics meetings that's kind of a clinical meeting but there was a psychiatry resident talking about you know he's presenting some of the literature on schizophrenia, cnb's, and things like that, which is obviously something i'm super interested in so - so in any case it gave me some ideas about things just this was just a paper he presented, but just something we should pursue in terms of looking at different ways of looking at genetic risk. so, yeah. and i guess a lot of it is discussion too, and sometimes when you just have some sort of problem and just talking through it with colleagues then that's helpful in terms of coming up with new ideas of how to deal with it. : yeah... i'm trying - i feel like there was a good example of this recently but i can't think of exactly what it was. yeah so, so i think sometimes um someone will suggest something in terms of the nature of some phenomenon for example and i will just have an intuitive sense that i don't - i have no evidence, but i don't think that's how it works and so that kind of thing and then you know. then i do, well that's actually helpful because then i think "well how could, what would be the experiment or what would be the way we could test it to say you know that's actually wrong or something like that, but. : yeah so i think i'm pretty agreeable on the surface –laughs- i may not be like secretly i'm not that agreeable, i don't know, but yeah i think that, i think i'm pretty agreeable socially but i do think that if someone suggests something that just like doesn't strike me as the right you know sort of intuition about it then i will say "well i feel differently about this" but you know but then and sometimes i will hold off on even saying that if i don't really feel like i have some evidence to back that up, so then i'll try to find out more about it before i move to say "no i don't think that's right" or just "we should figure out a way to test which of these things is true."  : yes yes perfectly. : yes uh no, uh actually uh could you – did you mention load- : yeah that's great.. : thanks i appreciate it : uhh, ummm (silence) i guess i should have devised umm ...i guess i'm most proud of having (silence) developed an understanding of fundamental science, fundamental engineering, and to develop the ability to solve problems. that umm well previously umm i it wasn't possible : i would say most of all to believing that i had to understand everything. i had to particularly understand uhhh the most difficult concept and that i had to work hard at. umm … : the hardest is then to umm overcome the challenge of constructing umm organizations and teams and supporting organizations and teams to produce results that address an unmet need. : there have been several  : probably the most important one was the development of internet works : umm this was at a time when the concept was frowned upon, and we had an enormous amount of pushback from every community with only umm very rare encouragement. uhh but we persisted and umm it has now become a very large field.  : uhh that stimulated interests in that i felt that internet works would be fundamental to everything from protecting the environment to national security to wearable such as for healthcare. umm so it was inspiring the sense of knowing that we had many many decades of discovery innovation that we had : well umm i find myself sometimes being able to exploit experience from combined knowledge of science, physics in particular, um and engineering and experience with building things that i –i feel like sometimes i know and i'm certain that an objective will be successful before other people do : because other people umm, often are covered by a mindset- uhh the mindset that they're limited to umm to considering ways to be successful only if it follows a previous experience.  : umm a.. starting with umm, basic science always as a umm background in judgment uhh allows an individual to dispense what any umm encumbrances associated with mindset, conservatism, ummmm, or concern, and that's a lot of the the uhh to be passionate about an objective ummm well before umm other individuals are willing to accept this. umm it umm there's a great quote from [name 1: person who ran the lab] who ran the laboratories at one time... : and umm that all great ideas at the beginning have enemies and umm a really really great idea, something that is really going to change the world, is by its nature, unexpected, umm unanticipated, um and revolutionary and likely to create problems along with the premise of itself, and its premise might be of those, associated with the people that are comfortable ummm in a world or environment that does not include this idea. and so what this means, that there is uhhh, if you're pursuing something that’s really remarkably new, you should anticipate there will be a time when there won't be much encouragement umm and it might even be very difficult to gain umm enthusiasm or build and inspire a team : umm and, it's so it can be quite a sacrifice, and there's a risk because uh there are times when we speak of being too early and what that means is that they've had to invest a long period of time ummm so for support before support begins. umm but umm yeah so anyways, i hope that i have answered that that question : umm for students i tell students that everything that you've learned every day you're going to use. that there isn't going to be anything that you learn that you're not going to use. umm and that everything counts. umm and then i try to with my team provide guidance to cause people to believe that they'll be successful, that they can take a risk on developing a solution, and that they will be successful. when people start with the mindset that their work is unacceptable and they're likely not to be successful, ummm that almost ensures failure. so the challenge is for people to adopt a mindset of believing, umm and to visualize believing. and if they do umm then if they're right, ummm they'll be successful. but they have to know this through the long periods where they may not be. because then one last thing, it is extremely important for people who are exploring some new avenue, again to believe and to be absolutely careful not to overlook the insight that is essential to success. you don't know when it's going to arrive : and you don't know when a mistake might occur that could cause you not to pursue a pathway. umm uh and in my career at one point there was umm, there were two investigators who helped me win the nobel prize for the development of a solution, and their solution that they developed after another group had tried to accomplish the same goal, and that group had failed, because they wrote a long paper describing why what they were doing was ultimate and why no one could do anymore.  and they felt bad that they didn't get credit later on for having contributed to the solution for the nobel prize. but the individuals who won the nobel prize took a different approach. they had never read that negative paper. had they done so, they might not even have tried.  : uh that’s a good question, i think a blend is important. i think that, specializing early is a mistake, but putting off specialization, prevents the individual from the experience of, obtaining the experience of development in depth. in other words i'm very much a believer in that 10 year 10,000 hour rule. and in your life, you can have multiple of these 10 year 10,000 hour uhh developments, and so i believe someone should start off broad and explore many different avenues, umm in research for example, but at the same time have one that is the uhh this is sometimes referred to umm in a profile as sort of um, like the letter t, where there's a broad umm range of different activities but one deep exploration into one particular avenue : uh it from what i hear from what you're saying in identity : so umm i think it's helpful to not be burdened with the need to establish an identity and ideally be in an environment where many, many ideas are encouraged. to have a management that umm simply rewards effort and exploration and you know, excitement, and ….curiosity, and applauds achievement.  umm so once an individual has established an identity then theres, kind of was, propels it to trying to support that identity and that makes it difficult to switch into new areas that might appear. one of the most important things is to realize that don’t be taxed when you have to drop everything you're doing... and change. : ...because a new discovery, a new idea has come along.  : umm, i guess to me it's umm a sense of, of service. i feel that if there's an unmet need uhh that's urgent, ummm in any area i feel uhh compelled to address it, uh to the point where if there are individuals who ya know may have an identity in a field that are teaching a field or a solution or a product in the wrong direction, it isn't really helpful to society, umm uhh i find that even disturbing. : and i'm all the more motivated to want to correct whatever she gets wrong. and not by hindering down, but by forging a new path : i think that is one of them, yes, yes.  : yes, well uh a good example is that i've been involved in a series of innovations in the field of physics uhh for a long time. and i was a big supporter of that and umm i became very successful, i was able to build a team, and then i started to become excited about sensor-networks and that connection between sensing and networking of the internet in a sense that we would be measuring, someday everything. and now, there are many people who believe that widely. and i had to start to abandon what i did before, you know things i was interested in, but that was difficult because there were many people that had sort of relied on me to be a driving force in that area, and fortunately i knew people that had become senior enough who could then start to seek leadership of this and ultimately were very successful. umm and then that allowed me to start this new area. but um, i tried to be as careful as i could about that so as not to cause anyone to be umm disillusioned or umm or confuse results umm and it was interesting people didn't understand always what i was doing and umm it became really quite difficult umm at times. umm a lot of people that were used to our success in one area weren't sure that we would be successful in this new area. ultimately we were even more so. but um, they it was a risk. they were like our sponsors, colleagues, and so on : umm yes, quite a few. there's been for example people who have been passionate through their entire lives about solving a particular problem in healthcare delivery and i found that when i encountered that, they'll express a need and the need can only be met by developing a product that is available worldwide that directly addresses the need and i find that inspiring.  : umm, and that's been a fuel for myself and my group and our whole organization. and i i feel uh immensely privileged, umm and mostly throughout the years, nearly all aren't inspired this way, they are instead, well it goes back to identity.. : they have an identity and they see their identity is to pursue a particular technology problem and then they simply look for problems that fit into that technology problem as opposed to looking for problems that need to be solved. umm and so what i find is that i do the latter. i look for a problem that needs to be solved where i think the technology is something i can learn. and often, it has required me to learn an entirely new field for that i had never had exposure to before, but i really feel badly about people that umm give all an area or solution or a product and make it fashionable and attractive long after it's really useful...umm just to sort of promote their own identity. again, i don't, i don't feel bad about them personally, but i think that they need control.  : umm yes, a good example in wireless cells we pursued major protection and physiological monitoring and that's still under way and it's still really effective and growing and we've gotten a fantastic opportunity right now in monitoring the heart, and that involves an inspiration, my position, and we switched from one field to another. and from now we are focused most of our time in heart function monitoring. but again it happened recently with umm these people, like you know [name 2: one person the participant interacts with], and [name 3: another person the participant interacts with], they knew what we were doing in wireless cells and they felt that mobile monitoring, we'd have to use that on understanding the origins and interventions for depression by providing people with a constantly available sensing system, diagnostic system and intervention system that provides and gives access to the real world. umm and so that mental health and wellness, is now a very large dimension of our work, and it's very different from everything we’ve done before, but umm i'm very confident that we will be successful and we already have success and there's already growth. it’s another example of a first mover- where [university 1] is the first and the largest in the field.  : i think so, yes i generally am able to umm detect that... : it-it's really passion and a willingness to work hard and it's less their experience. i find that people that are, have you know sufficient intellectual capabilities to be successful in our field uhh will be very successful if they're utterly passionate, but the passion to be uhh absolutely dedicated to being successful is umm is essential. and not many bring that.  : uh yes, absolutely, i think that umm that these elements of umm passion, umm mindset, a growth mindset, focused on belief, umm is essential. um you know, i have not read enough about flow, but i've read everything i i can : and i-i think it is essential for a group to capture flow and to operate in a zone. and i can tell when our group is in it's zone and it's in flow. and a lot of it comes down to what the group leader is thinking. i work really really hard on trying to be as positive as possible and to project a growth mindset even when there's other problems in my life : ….and my work life that would cause me to be more negative say in a group meeting. uhh i have to really utterly avoid that and not let anything offend the way of inspiring people.  : well it's very interesting, i've had the opportunity to work with great individuals of both genders... : umm when i was at [institution 1], a long time ago, this was like in the late 70's to mid 80's, so right from my undergraduate to my ph.d. umm, there was a woman, named [name 4: an important female figure], who was one of the great physicists in understanding the origin of night- and umm i've always thought then and to this day how much she accomplished and how many people she inspired umm and sensitive that it also is a woman, ummm at a time when being a female employee at fort would have been ridiculously difficult you know, beyond belief i can't even imagine. umm uhh and she had to fight through that, but umm she did so without projecting a negative mindset, umm and then if i look at people that i've worked with who umm may adopt an identity and then are encumbered by that identity and maybe even mislead a large community because they simply need to maintain an identity and their goal is to support them and to shape the work around them so they have the best support- i see that character in people of both genders. um i think then there are as many individuals in both genders who are more exploratory and more of a growth mindset. gender issues ummm affect, have affected many many individuals, umm and i think i have been experienced with this in that i started my career in the 80's at a time when there were very few women in science compared to now or in engineering. umm and that's fortunately changing. uhh on that note, i'm in the last couple of years have been very engaged in developing curriculum for freshmen their first quarter and their first year at [university 1] across all engineering fields. and i find that there is much greater gender diversity, and a much more level mindset, and i'm afraid that without the inspiration that comes from this undergraduate freshmen curriculum, that students aren't going to have the fuel to keep them going. umm so that's the reason why we created this curriculum : ..to adjust it.. um : umm it's very difficult, especially now. umm because the time spent umm now uhh compared to what it was when i started my career is staggering. i always worked 7 days a week but now, umm you could literally work like just around the clock and not even keep up. umm so i'd say that based on experience, most important thing is to keep certain aspects of one's life umm you know in __-. so especially with the growing family of having, making sure that you have time for children. ummm i was really really fortunate that both my daughters came along before email became a complete consuming 24-7 umm activity. umm and i think we talk my wife and i almost every day about how we had seen that in our daughters what they do, what they treasure, and how they spend their time, umm even if it was things that we engaged in and that they weren't so into- it required an effort on their part when they were very small, is now something that they just do and enjoy. umm that's one thing. the second thing is umm to have time for one's self in an activity that is challenging and enriching and that might be fitness. umm i think that's actually critical, and to always have these times, and they are in two ways: if you're spending time like that, you have a safety valve, someone gave me some really important advice i've never forgotten, that um i took up flying at one point- i learned to fly. we took many family vacations that way when i arrived here at [university 1] i had to stop because i just couldn't -no longer had the time to stay current as a priority, and i never thought i would ever stop flying. but i remember once early in my career when i did take up flying i had a manager tell me, i told him i say you know i worry if this is going to take up too much and he said oh no, you need it because if you spend all of your time you commit entirely to work, if there's an emergency and you need to spend more time at something, you won't have the safety valve, here’s your safety valve. you could fly one week, and you've got six hours back, you know.  : umm, and so yeah i i really strongly believe in that, and now i- i now know the value of activity and um there are so many disorders, conventional amongst almost every aspect of physiology that is utterly dependent on activity. we've we're born to be active we have evolved to be active, it controls every aspect of our life. and when we are inactive as we must be, you know meetings and so on, it's devastating for our health, absolutely. it it brings tears to your eyes as we work with so many heart failure subjects who have arrived at their point in life where they are at risk of dying and they have immense costs all due to the fact that they were inactive and it either led to diabetes and then associated comorbidities, congestive heart failure, it's just really unfortunate to afford this. so yeah for someone starting in the field budgeting time for family and ones self is essential : well it’s very interesting and i think i only realized relatively recently like in the past 2 years, i think umm so i wasn't taught a growth mindset, umm well i-i take it back, ummm i was by my father i was taught a growth mindset when i was older, we didn't know what that was then. umm but it wasn't pervasive. umm so i didn't get that. umm what i did get was a mindset to never quit, to never give up. umm and that hard work, that everything depends upon hard work. and i think that was a umm something much more easily acquired than people who grew up in the mid to late 60's. umm there was umm parents at that time all who weren't trying to make life easier for their children. umm it was, they were afraid, they they had come out of the depression, and they were afraid of failure-. and they taught the children to be frankly nervous about the future and to invest very heavily and to never assume that they were going to be given anything, and that anything would come as the result of hard work.  : umm well it's interesting i don't really ask of them to you know validate me. umm and i think that's a good thing, in a sense that ummm i'm not reliant on them to validate me or encourage me. umm but there are many many times when i felt that i needed to deliver to ummm honor their faith in me. i think they take it for granted that i will do things right, and that in itself creates a sense of responsibility that i had to live up to that.  : uhh it’s a combination of both uh introspection and collaboration. umm i find that i need both, i need time to be able to think on my own, i need to be able to hammer in a problem for a long time and then for events to have to cause me to put it aside for hours or days and then a solution appears. and then i also need to be able to discuss ideas with others. um and often its really interesting, that someone will suggest an idea or approach you know and i will respect it and take it into consideration and then maybe literally it may be days, weeks, months or sometimes even more than a year later, when i will suddenly realize the value of that idea in the context of other things i've learned. umm .. : that is a very good question. umm both are important. umm i attribute many many inventions and to me the most important, to be intuition, and often rationality is the biggest barrier and the enemy. uhh there are many times in my life when, on the basis of intuition and some insight that take a normal problem that everyone else thought was impossible and where i'm convinced i was in an organization where other people were present, who had oversight and they would have told me not to pursue something, they later turned out to be valuable. umm and i've been fortunate and i think most attracted to environments that that umm where i avoid that or where i seek out mentors that say sure bob, you pursue an idea, they say that's great, go for it. umm and then i i think i find myself being attracted to people that are ever positive in that regard. umm and support intuition and then i think often it's interesting that there are people who will fight how frequent it is that scientists may umm have their greatest results in their first, before age 30. and it's not because anything goes wrong with one's mind, its because people develop as you say an identity, and wish to support that and it becomes important for them to, well they become attracted to having a reputation and being rewarded. umm by that, and then they don’t, they lose the ability and they become afraid, and they start to apply rationality, they stop listening to their intuition. now intuition without rationality, is also a concern too. umm so yeah its important to have both. i know for me it sounds strange perhaps but um, i actually i don't mind receiving awards but i don't particularly like it. i don't like to go to awards ceremonies, things like that. i know there are some people that just live for that and that's their whole life and their whole life is structured around getting that next award. and unfortunately in many communities, they serve the reversed, and that tends to limit what young people do so people that are just excited about ideas and exploration tend to not prosper because they are not motivated by awards or making the kinds of decisions that lead to awards. the thing that is true is ya know, support the research, umm people that follow something fashionable and who appear to be able to add additional value to a field already declared as fashionable, are likely to receive funding, because its good for that community which wants to support itself. umm and so such people continue on long after the work they're doing is useful. umm if you look at depression grand challenge, its an example where depression was not recognized widely as a umm an area that should be supported. it is, it should be, but it hasn’t gotten potential support and so raising funding for it, is a challenge. umm but its of the approach to raising funding is to describe the urgency, of the solution and the benefits that all accrue, but that's how it is because umm fewer people are willing to adopt. : umm, i-i start with an outline and start with a "what" paper you know within a week or a month and then begin to promote this to colleagues umm or people that report to me umm to inspire them and then it is very important to explore early or quickly and to develop an over indication of success and use that as fuel, umm motivational fuel. : yes, umm goals are critical, umm really goals to which umm you can adhere to a submission are essential.  : umm i probably engaged in scientific work for the entire day except for umm umm the time i spend with fitness, so umm and ummm with my wife and i spend time together umm, our daughters are now umm on their own, umm like uhh so yeah i-i would say in ummm in a say 16-18 hours day i spend maybe all but about 2 hours umm engaged in um work or reading or meetings or somehow considering uhh our product development. : uhh yes, absolutely. uhh the experience from having solved many problems is umm essential because ideas are so for new projects and accomplishments are so integrative, it's the combination of insight for many different experiences that is i think essential to me. : umm i would say i probably umm produced a greater diversity of solutions than other people in my field. and uh it's to some extent of more solutions as well.  : umm, i feel urged to revise work to make sure that a given is always educated and always ideal. umm if something is successful ummm then uhhh i don't feel any need to go back and to revise.  : i think when it's, when it's clear it will be widely adopted. : umm, i find that it's a sudden insight. i will hear about a problem, ummm  or a need, and all of a sudden insight regarding how i can recruit capabilities, solutions, and elements, to solve a problem. i can think of so many examples when the insight occurred during the time that someone was expressing in one sentence, and i suddenly realized. like for example in our heart function monitor, a position heard the talk about another topic and said, "i think what you're doing could solve our problem in heart function monitor," and instantly said that i knew my life would be different, i knew i could do it.  : well, i think one is umm, is ya know, curiosity and broad interest- be interested in many different umm theoretical and experimental topics in fields is important, not being biased, not being negative about a particular area or a potential contribution. umm and then not being dependent upon maintaining that affinity, or a fashionable uhh field, but to make sure to being responsible about contributing what is the most important next to subjective. : i would say both, uhh i'm very focused but there are times i can be distracted. : no i retain things well. : umm, probably so, not so much. : umm, i definitely would say that uhh inhibitions are important, and i try to adopt that, i try to avoid being completely uninhibited. i think that the uninhibited uhhh can be disastrous because umm people invent things that are just not going to be useful. they might be successful in some respect but never make a difference in science or engineering. uhh so being inhibited about the right things, it is quite essential, and it takes discipline. : umm i would say to some extent.  : i'm sorry? : mmm yes no i don't think that term describes me.  : no, i don't think so. : i would say now uhh i have developed somewhat more inhibition to better refine directions i think. i think that one that is successful in the past umm and i feel like i've been really sucessful, i feel like i was fortunate to have mentors provide me with guidance, and i always came to depend upon that so i've had to umm develop the inhibition of mind as well.  : hmmm. it may be that we've touched on everything : but i guess the one thing would be positive mindset. i think again it's just very important for me to believe in success in the face of really significant challenge. i feel often that that's the only thing that has led to success. i know that in every time i've been successful in the dark times when it appears that it would not have been. : well thank you, i really appreciate this and umm i, i should run but i look forward to later in the trial when you already look to or distribute your findings, that will be fantastic : yes i can hear you! : okay : i'm ready : um my children : laughs, i guess the reason i'm most proud of it because it's been the hardest for me and i think creativity you have to be creative in keeping up with them and keeping them entertained so it's challenging but that’s why i'm most proud of it  : that’s a really good question i guess my mom's illness is probably the hardest i don’t know if it was hardest to overcome she had leukemia she's in remission now thank goodness but it was a very challenging time  : well i think just being really close to her you know physically but then and also emotionally being engaged with her and i think that really helped and i have a really good relationship with my sisters and so that really helped also because we were all experiencing the same you know the same sadness about it : well i think yeah that’s interesting so right now i'm really interested in the effects of sleep on the developing brain and that project you know the yeah the question was really of interest to me after i had my first child because of my severe sleep deprivation  : so i felt like i just i couldn’t function i couldn’t imagine teenagers who have so much else going on so many other changes and on top of it have this severe sleep deprivation how that must impact their brains and was surprised to learn there is very little known about how normative changes in the brain i'm sorry normative changes in sleep during adolescence impact the brain  : well i just started to realize there is much more to sleep than just sleep duration how long we're in bed really thinking about all of the many factors that influence quality of sleep and that ranges from the physical environment how loud is it how comfortable your bed or your pillow to more psychological disturbances that maybe just have us ruminating late at night that could preclude sleep and so knowing that out there a lot of emotional changes in the brain during adolescence also made sense that could contribute to challenges in sleep in addition to the fact that they're up on social media and things like that  : i think that the best advice is to work on projects that are really of interest to you and that seems obvious but i think many of us sometimes get pulled into other projects simply because we want to collaborate with a particular person or because the you know funding agencies are interested in some problem but i found that when i work on projects that i'm less excited about they don’t go as well you now i find less motivation to think about them all the time or try to work through problems that you know always come up in planned projects and so when i found you know right now sleep and other projects as well when i work on projects that i really think about from a personal perspective that really gives additional energy to the project   : absolutely yeah when i first started i was so hesitant to say i'm really interested in x because i was so concerned about whether it would be of interest to other you know my audience to my colleagues to my advisors to anyone else and i think that really was an impediment to really being more creative to what i'm you know what i bring to the project so i think i don’t know how exactly that changed but instantly find myself just more energized by the things i work on because i just find them more interesting because it's taken 10 years to figure that out  : yeah i bet that’s also a really good question that too is probably been the number one reason i'm still so excited about the work i do is because i've been fortunate to find really good friends and colleagues or colleagues who became friends or vice versa one person in particular i went to graduate school with her name is [name 1: participant’s friend] (6:06 not sure of name) and she we were in graduate school together and you know suffering through everything that is graduate school and then lucky enough to end up in the same department for our first job here at [university 1: where the participant got the first job] and i think it made the world different because we would seamlessly go from talking about work challenges to personal life issues and you know joys and things like that it really it really just made coming to work fun because you know not only that -(inaudible)- but i got to see my friend and my advisors and mentors similarly i have been lucky to have really supportive ones i still reach out to them for advice you know career advice and otherwise and it's nice to know that i have someone to bounce ideas off of and not be stuck alone in my office worried about things  : yeah um i think that its i think it's tough i think earlier is probably better both from a practical perspective in that it facilitates you know promotions for instance for like tenure many institutions really want to insure your work is independent from advisors or mentors but also just like logically it just feels good to feel you are pursuing a question that is of interest to you that it wasn’t you know an offshoot of what your mentor did or you know minor tweak to something that’s very common in the field and so that establishing that identity as an academic or as a scientist i think helpful in many multiple levels : hm yeah i well you know everyone's different and there's room for everyone in this space because certainly there needs to be leaders big thinkers and then also but then also the worker bees who are really interested in you know the minute more detailed components of the study so i think one naturally gravitates towards whichever one finds more energizing but so i don’t know i think it would really be just what is most enjoyable for people being a leader sometimes isn't and sometimes it is it's hard to say  : yeah so what do you mean in general why area of research is important  : you know i think it's important because there's it's important to know relatively speaking with other areas or developmental periods of life there's less known about adolescence and some interested in the adolescent period in it of itself because it's interesting but also because we have i think we're undergoing a shift in society how we view adolescence from pathologizing them to you know celebrating them to really thinking about why would we evolve in this period of life where we are more interested in exploring the world around us and establishing social relationships in ways that we don’t previously or later in life so from a broader sense that’s why i think adolescence is important i also just like talking to adolescents so that’s the answer : yeah i do i think that i you know finding this area that just really interests me whether or not i'm thinking about it for particular project or just because i'm thinking about how we develop i think it's really important to contribute in a way that will be useful to others you know in finding research data or new findings about the adolescent brain that might be applied to policies for instances so some of our work has been applied to the juvenile justice system and i find that deeply gratifying to know that something that we struggled through in the lab actually had implications for someone's life especially individuals who are reared in disadvantaged neighborhoods or backgrounds and i think it's really important and adolescent development is something that catches the publics ear and so that i think you know that is fun : yeah so i think that there have been yes certainly that comes back to what i saying earlier working on projects that you know were interesting but i couldn’t directly feel i didn’t connect directly feel connected to the project or field or i couldn’t envision the way it could be useful beyond you know the science domain so over the years i found that when i work on projects that have relevant for the public sphere i'm just naturally more engaged in the projects themselves : yeah exactly : yeah so my phd mentor [name 2: the participant’s phd mentor] was as one of the huge influences and continues to be because i admire her both as a scientist but also simply as a person and really try to emulate her energy and her stamina for you know for research and times when sometimes it's easier sometimes when you fall into a project that is really interesting to you and to others and in time when you are working on something that’s you know struggle more with you know to get funding or find data that's interesting or something and from her i really learned the importance of just being supportive of students and of others you're working with and not you know and really assume that everyone is doing their best and like i said i try to emulate that positive attitude that she taught me and you know i realize that the importance of having a positive attitude for yourself but also for those you work with  : um yeah it was more general career related you know there's no one path in academia or i guess in any job just talking to her about the different ways i could use the training i had gotten in graduate school for either staying in traditional academic job or  pursuing other ways to use you know training in cognitive neuroscience and to just think about where what would i find most satisfying and i think it's helpful to hear from someone who is an established scientist their path and you know to hear they too have struggled and doubts about things so i guess just her honesty was what really was helpful    : yeah i really enjoy it for those reasons i just said about her i really enjoy working with students and i think right now there's an increasing trend of graduate students recognizing there may not be jobs for everybody who's getting a phd and for them to think about alternative careers and realize that even though that it seems as though there's only one path when you're in this academic environment there really are  so many different things to do and so many different way you can contribute to society and i think that one thing really that graduate students really struggle with is this idea that you're working on this sometimes mundane things and you ask yourself how is this going to be helpful for anyone how is this really going to contribute so it's hard to see the bigger picture to allow them to have those doubts and concerns is really important to me and i wouldn’t get that if i wasn’t a direct mentor to others  : i think the biggest thing i want to convey to them is that they that their ideas are good ones because our field is really based on a lot of things but how creative and how many ideas and new ideas you have is really central to people's success and sometimes you feel as though all the good ideas are taken like what am i going to do and you may think that your own interests are not of interest to others and that can be really scary and it’s a huge risk to pursue those less popular ideas but i try to encourage them to think about that’s where the creativity comes in that where you can really pave a new road and really find new ways to think about for instance the adolescent brain or you know whatever it is  : i wish i could it's really hard i think it's really hard you know because when we interview residents they're all smart that’s why we brought them into the view and everyone says the same thing i really am passionate that’s what i want do to and so trying to really discern what motivates that quote passion is really important because individuals who are motivated by external ideas of what they'll gain or ideas of what you know status or whatever is different than people who are just intrinsically motivated to learn about one particular aspect of psychology so that’s really really challenging in part i think because people don’t come into graduate school interviews trying to lie or they really believe they want to do this but you know it's not always the case  : yeah i mean i don’t try to say it so directly they’ll say because i really want to know about the adolescent brain i'll say things like i'll ask more about how they work through challenges or what are they most confident about or what are they most concerned about in graduate school and if they say things like well i just feel like i can't handle the work you know that’s terrible that’s over if you get that it means they're really not going to do it so i think just things like that it's really hard to know  : you know i don’t i simply don’t notice it the front end when they come in i think they all seem very similar what i do notice certainly is that simply the demographics of my colleagues is changes in terms of men and women there's fewer women at higher levels of the ladder but in terms of their personality characteristics their traits i don’t really notice general differences  : what do you know this is the really big question in academia everywhere about the work force an how women not just in academia but in their other fields how likely to be ceo's are less likely to be leading big teams and i don’t know you know the common error of course i'm sure you know are based on work life balance or things like that and maybe that’s true with academia in particular maybe that plays a role i think that in part women are you know less likely to be promoted in certain domains or less likely to be hired in the first place already it starts to kind of whittle down the number of women in the field who are you know available for promotion and things like that  : yeah one thing i tell to my graduate students marry the right person i mean find the partner who's really going to be your partner i am incredibly lucky to have married who puts my career on equal if not higher level than his and he is the primary care giver i mean he is also a faculty member here at [university 1] you know i travel more for work he's more likely to go home early if one of the kids is sick he more likely stay home with them so that i think and without resentment or anything like that that’s really allowed me to not as though all the burden is on me to do the home care domestic you know activities that women often do  : it wasn’t explicit in that i at the time didn’t think i wanted to have children at all and he wasn’t sure either and so that wasn’t exactly something i was thinking about but i certainly was thinking about someone who treated with a lot of respect and there was a lot of equity from the beginning i met him right after i graduated from a women's college so it was carefully on the lookout for any guys you know feeling like a leper then or something and so i think that really the traits that i picked up on in other domains really translated into my you know all those things i said that about work life balance : yeah i think they’ve been influential mostly in that you know some of the ideas that i've been most excited about have come from you know coffee house chats where we were just bouncing off ideas and they kind of marinate and eventually i think more about them having the opportunity to discuss and bounce off ideas in an informal way with friends and colleagues has been really helpful because the ideas i can think about them and think through them without the pressure of writing it for a grant or writing it for a paper or something like that so i think that’s why establishing the social relationships in the work environment have been so important to me and why i have i enjoy them so much because it's kind of a space to think about ideas you know not just in my own head but with someone who has an opinion an informed opinion but also just you know non-threatening  : no not at all i think it usually just happens you know it just we'd be talking about something else and i'm like what do you think about this or you know just something that i'd be thinking or my the one friend in particular i was mentioning earlier since sadly moved to [country 1: where the participant’s friend moved to] and i'll still throughout the day just call her and say quick question what do you think about this idea or she'll g-chat me or you know just it's just kind of spitfire just when it comes i just we talk about it : yeah it's like you know what do you think of this or i'm doing this new project help me think of the best way to do it that’s kind of more what it is now so yeah you know it's funny we've never formally collaborated together but it's just she has informed a lot of my work regardless : it's neat : yeah well academically they certainly didn’t have a direct hand you know both of my parents my dad my mom didn’t finish high school my dad maybe finished like a year or two of college and so they academically didn’t have a say exactly i'm still not sure they know exactly what i do but that’s okay but i think that the almost more important thing that they contributed are this you know they both immigrated to this country don’t speak the language that kind of a thing and they're just fearless they certainly don’t feel afraid of trying things that may not work or being in new territory and you know from being a very small child they just had very high expectations like we know you're a very smart person you can do what you want and i now realize that was a very special message to send me because we certainly didn’t have the economic means so they could be promising that i could do whatever i wanted you know so i just think that it's kind of a testament to their almost fantasy land confidence in us and in them us meaning me and my sisters and i think that’s really carried me through so just their support i like i said earlier with my mom's cancer you know when i feel either frustrated at work or something their perspective is so distinct like they remind that it's not that big a deal and i think that's just super important for me to hear when i'm otherwise surrounded by academics who are equally worried about grant or whatever it is  : yeah i played a lot with my dad yeah he and i would you know we'd ride bikes a lot together around the neighborhood around the park he because he was learning english we would go to the library a lot he would drop me off in the children's area and go i don’t know read or find books and we just spent a lot of time in the library and then also the city college we spent he went to the city college at [city 1: where the participant’s father went to city college] he would take me with him because we otherwise didn’t have childcare so i just spent a lot of time doing those things with them. with my mom i spent a lot of time at her work she was a housekeeper and so she didn’t have childcare and she would bring me and you know i just hang out and now i cant imagine doing that to my child they didn’t think twice about it like this is what we're doing so i guess they just left me alone a lot just kind of you know with them but also unentertained they didn’t even bring books and they just i would just hang out with them i just spent a lot of time with them i guess : well yeah i mean i think yeah they are my dad more so than my mom yeah my dad is just really you cant tell we're just really on the same page my sisters are also yeah they are my older sister is a medical translator and my younger sister is a lawyer we're very different people but you know we grew up in the same house there are some similarities i guess : yeah so yeah like i said before bill has really influenced it indirectly never regretful and he has always just been very supportive and encouraging and like i said he's a scientist so with him i actually do talk a lot about work not details of work general you know the structure of the academic world and that’s been he's very helpful and what was the other part of the question? : yeah well i told you the sweet stuff directly but also something else that happened once i had children is that i really had a just reshape how and when i worked it seems trivial but it actually made me evolve i'll explain so before i had kids we my husband and i would come to work and basically be exhausted we'd leave at like 8 or 9 you know whenever it was and now that we have kids we have to leave right at 5 basically we have a childcare deal and then from 5-8 i absolutely do no work and just work with focus on them and hang out with them and then when they go to sleep i start doing work again and its made me more productive you know my time is limited whenever i am working and you know i'm not messing around doing other stuff going to coffee its been really helpful and it just makes me feel more present when i'm with them which i like  : yeah they come from different so like well that’s like a personal example mostly they come from just observing adolescents for instance often in the mornings i've my brain is fresh most fresh that’s when i write and i often write in coffeehouses and i like to go to one in particular in [district 1: where the participant loves to work] that’s next to a high school and all the teenagers come in and i just observe them and i think about what they're talking about and what interests them their mannerisms so my next step project is i really want to study the role of touch during adolescence and i have this idea that their made that touch receptors in the brain are think are more sensitive during adolescence from an evolutionary perspective that makes sense because the puberty procreation and it makes sense that you are more comfortable with touching someone else but they just do it all the time you observe adolescents and for no reason they'd be touching but they are and i find it endearing but i also want to think about what is regarding about it or is it more rewarding for them than for adults you know anyways and that just came from watching them because its funny same thing with laughter i think laughter is such a bonding to glue you know prolive (not sure about word 31:50) but in adolescence its seems to serve a particular function that i really want to study but haven't done it yet but most of my ideas come from kind of the subjects themselves  : mine are 5 and 2 : yeah totally my husband is afraid but i'm super excited when they're going to be teenagers  : yeah so like once something's done what do i do next? : yeah you know well usually either i'm already thinking about the next like i already told what i'm thinking about next sometimes just ideas come up within the project itself so the sleep project we really hypothesized that you know emotional rumination or social media would really predict kid teenagers were sleeping and that would influence brain development but what we're finding is that the number one predictor isn't socioeconomic status or parental relations or social media its actually just pillow comfort and i find that so fascinating because of course! of course like if you're not physically comfortable you're not sleeping well but its something parents are not talking about so in a follow up study what we're doing interviewing kids about their you know physical environment bed comfort physical none of them think about it the parents are like ,"i've never asked them if they're comfortable or not!" you know so i think its interesting and i want to do a follow up mini intervention because wouldn’t it be so interesting if we could give kids who are otherwise under resourced pillows and that would solve a lot of their sleep problems  : so anyway so sometimes the ideas just come from the data itself : no, the difficulty is in the money you know the grants is always the issue the funding so no i don't : yeah its you know it doesn’t really shift the idea it just shifts if and when i do it of course but also it just takes time because then if i have an idea i'll just apply to a lot of grants and find that i've spent half a year writing grants and so that is less energy i do than doing the project you know so and some idea i've had that eventually so much time has passed i've lost interest in the idea so maybe it was better that i didn’t get funded for it after all but some have really stuck that i really still want to find a way to do it  : hm um how much do i attribute to each? : yeah i think i mostly work more based on intuition and the rationality comes more in the actual design of the project you know the idea is more intuition and the rationality is more the nuts and bolts how we're actually going to get things done : yeah i mean certainly in the execution of it, it really helps to be you know organized willing to be methodical about it yeah i guess yeah certainly its certainly makes it more successful but not at the front end  : yeah all the time i love yoga i'm addicted to yoga so whenever i'm doing yoga i know you're supposed to be clearing your brain but i'm not clearing my brain i'm thinking about you know what i want to do or what interests me and so its actually great its so free flowing that i'm not focused on one thing and feel like i've read wantu (book?) and cant write it down so : yeah its probably when i have the most is when i'm not in my office when i'm doing yoga or like i said at the coffeeshop when i'm writing that that’s really helpful i don’t yeah i don’t usually like i said on the weekends not typically which is usually when people have leisure time i don’t really think that much about work you know because i'm with the kids and i want to think about the kids and see  what they're doing   : yeah i usually get about 8 hours of sleep : no i've always yeah always being really into sleep i really value sleep a lot and i've been surprised in this project learning how people how little people value sleep you know i know that but to hear them say its not that important it that's crazy you know  : yeah so um yeah exactly i don’t keep a notebook but i have little notes here and there that i can if i get excited about something and then the execution part from a idea from b execution really comes from writing the grant or writing even in irb submission for something makes me really think about the details and how i'm actually going to get the project done and what do i need to know before i get the project started that really comes more formally when i'm actually telling someone else what i'm doing or what i want to do something : no i typically publish it right i away when i like if i haven't thought about it for a few months i'm  going to get bored and not do it and i encourage my students to also publish it right away  : both you know i like to both have been fun so i think i when i have my own like an idea i'm excited about that no one may care about like this (laughing) thing i'd rather not work on a team because i know this sounds really selfish but like i don't want to compromise what i'm excited about you know what i mean and sometimes compromises happen when you start working with someone like well why don’t we say when they laugh only with their best friend you know whenever its not mine so i don’t care so when its my own idea yes i like to just work on my own but i also have several collaborators that i really learn from and enjoy working with again because i like having the social interactions and those kind of  projects usually come when someone else has an idea, well we would really love your expertise on the adolescent brain how about we work together then it makes it fun because they're leading and i'm very happy when someone else is leading and you know just let me know who i can be useful than me trying to bring them in on my idea  : hm not a specific one usually like i mentioned earlier thinking about how it might be useful down the line is always something in the back of my mind and thinking and in part that’s because some of the talks i give are to parents or educators or teenagers themselves and i like to remember how this would be interesting to them how they're going to hear this so thats always a little bit of a something that running through my mind i don’t know if that's and objective necessarily  : huh well other than working in different places no i don’t  : it depends on what i'm working on so when i was working on a book last year i worked in a different place everyday because if not i would get crazy but when i'm working on like this quarter i was teaching two classes and i work in my office a lot because that’s where i work best you know there's a lot of student meetings and it just made logistical sense but in a quarter where i'm not teaching about 3 times a week i'll work in different places either in my office or at home or in a coffeeshop  : no i had i don’t know if this counts but i had this quarter started to use a time tracker  : which my sister who's a lawyer thinks its crazy because you know lawyers bill in like 8 minute increments or something and dock and i was just curious about i wanted to know how i spent my time what am i how what's the ratio between mentoring versus grant writing versus manuscript writing you know all these things i haven't looked at it lately its been 3 months so see how it all breaks down  : no its not manual it used to be in the lawyer world okay its online and it’s a software program an app called toggle and whenever i start a new activity i just put in there you know grading papers or whatever it is and then hit start and stop when i'm done and so it just tracks my time throughout the day  : no i haven't looked at the pattern i'm waiting until the break let the quarter end but it'll be interesting to see how i'm spending my time :  yeah i think it was interest  you know its i kind of like yeah partly just weird interest but also because i think sometimes we over what's the word overestimate how much time we don’t have you know what i mean like we feel so busy and then but are we am i that busy so that’s kind of what i wanted to know how much time am i really i feel like i spend a lot of time teaching for instance but how much time am i really spending on that or you know just and i was just and to shift like you were saying if i feel like somethings heavily weighted in one activity or another : um uh no i think not really i mean yeah there are times when i'm working on one particular project where i'm less focused on ideas or like we were saying before one i have an idea that i'm trying to get funding for and i spend a lot of time writing grants it’s an idea dead time you know because i'm not really thinking about other ideas i just want to i'm so focused on getting funding on one in particular  : exactly yeah : yeah i should be looking at my toggle but i don’t know um i guess about half the day yeah about half the day and like that really helps for me to not be in my office just working on science i usually do it somewhere else once i'm here i'm in meetings people stopping by you know its different : yeah i do, i just think trial and error you know just if you try different things somethings going to be fruitful yeah i think that makes sense  : yeah um yeah i certainly i don't usually keep a running narrative about number of papers but we get reviewed for promotion or advancement every two years and so it forces me to look at how productive i've been or not been  : yeah well i can tell you so this year was about 20 publications and then a few chapters and the book so i don’t know i'm satisfied with it certainly people are much more productive some people are much less productive so : yeah i think i produce slightly more but i think i spend less time on others kind of in part as i was saying before once we get you know result or finish a project we write it and that is also facilitated because i really like writing but i'm also really lucky to have students who are amazing writers and so theyre not daunted by the idea of having to write up a paper and sometimes i have had students who really struggled writing and that makes the process obviously longer, having them feel anxious about it or they just don’t like writing at all and so its just less fun for everybody  : uh not much and i think you know i the way that i write is that i'll have a draft a pretty detailed outline and then fill in the draft and then my editing process typically comes from others i ask other people to read the work and that’s very helpful because they can see what i'm not seeing and then once that happens its that’s it its out lots of reviewers tell me what's wrong with it yeah : yeah  : i just think that i just get antsy with the work you know if its sitting on my desk for too long i'm like oh my god i'm just going to send it so like i read or wrote it and someone else did too and i think we're just going to send it i don’t know i think i just when i feel energized about it i just send it i don’t really sit too long on it having said that though sorry i told you earlier about this book and now its not even published yet and i want to revise it so it just really depends on what it is i feel like that’s not finished even though because it had a deadline i was forced to finish it maybe that’s it you know what i just when i said that i felt maybe that’s why i feel so unsettled about it because i it wasn’t my choice of when to finish it it was the editor’s choice so anyway : yeah it really depends certainly i've never had a paper you mean the review process for the reviewers or something  : yeah i certainly usually my papers i've never had one just go in the first round they usually go through one very substantial review and then a follow up more minor edit kind of submission but when i get the reviews back the first time i spend a lot of time on addressing the reviewers concerns because i found sometimes if i just read them kind of a hasty manner i miss what the reviewers actually asking for and so i spend a lot of i've learned to spend a lot of time ensuring i understand what they're saying and that i adequately thoroughly address what they're saying because also as a reviewer its annoying when people don’t you spend all this time on the review and they don’t really you know they ignore your comments or something i take it very seriously maybe that why i feel like i'm finished when someone's reviewed it and they tell me its good or something : the final word i do i do and i didn’t used to think that but then now that i've you know talked to other colleagues you feel like i really need to get more papers out that’s always what it comes to is you know we'll talk about and they say i feel like its not good enough or i just want to do one more analysis although that’s important to be thorough sometimes i think it really gets in the way of actually getting things out more so i really think that’s anxiety based  you know worrying about what others are going to think because it is scary to have your work out there and in this increasingly common conversation we're having in psychology about replicability and things like that it is scary to feel like you're putting something out that’s not perfect but nothings perfect so   : its weird i don’t and the reason is weird because i'm otherwise a pretty anxious person like i worry about you know like is house clean enough thinking about you know everyone's role on the project you know i overthink about other things but not about that and i don’t know why i don’t know i think it because i know it cant be perfect so whereas my house can my delusional thinking it can be perfectly clean it just even though you know so i think i'm just that’s why i don’t worry about it : no certainly not i think no certainly not in graduate school i was really worried about it that’s one of the things where my mentor was just so instrumental in how i view paper submissions i mean her urgency it should have been out two weeks ago you know she was just so fast so compared to her i feel like a much slower person but it really taught me just that you know its important to keep the energy going and the momentum going and when you have that momentum and so i always feared she was she wanted to do things to quickly what if it wasn’t perfect you know after a while of i had to let go of that if i wanted to keep up i guess it worked she beat it into me  : yeah : yeah i think that you know i don’t know if i do it explicitly i certainly do think about the way things can inform other things you know for instance i was saying earlier about you know one hypothesis we had about the teen sleep was that because i know there are changes in the developing brain in emotion centers that influence how we sleep and vice versa i don’t know if i explicitly thought about them as explicitly thoughts bringing them together it was just in working on different projects that often have ideas blend into each other you know idea from one project will go into a different project and vice versa i think just working on different things is what make things you know cross foster ideas  : i don’t think i have particularly strong working memory or something you know higher cognitive nothing like that compared to my peers i just one thing though that my dad often brings up and he has it too is just really weird not weird but just spatial mapping in my head and so when i so for instances i really like looking at maps of like i hate it when people use gps like i want to figure it out on the map and then we get it to go that way because its kind of like a fun puzzle how the streets interconnect to each other and how we can get there in the fast more efficient way and so that kind of spatial mapping of the road and physical maps i kind of do also for my work so you know one project will be in my head there's a map of the different projects and then different aspects of it will connect so somehow it turns into a physical map in my head i think that’s because i really like maps i don’t know how to describe it  : i'm laughing because i never talk about that with people that’s so funny  : yeah i don’t well you know okay so again the analogy the physical map so if i'm every day i think if i'm going to go somewhere new where i don’t typically go i in my head there's a little my little car is following a map like i see that in my head and i do the same for my projects where if i'm at point a that’s my home you know and this is a project and i need to get to point b which is a new area i kind of create like a side road in my head of the new project does that make sense i don’t know how to describe it it sounds so weird : exactly yeah : that’s funny i guess it is i really never thought it through like that but yeah that’s exactly right like i physically like my head how closely related it is to a different project : i don’t know if like i do that but it does make sense when you talk about it that way that’s what i see in my head so anyway yeah so i think i just have a map like i think its almost like in the way you know sometimes people have whiteboards where they write out what they're working on and draw arrows and things i guess i do that kind of in my head  : i increasingly forget things quickly but it i think that’s just because i have too many things in my head but i do retain you know i guess i retain things more so than normal i don’t know : uh i think i'm focused : no : i think i hmm i certainly of aspects where i'm both i guess i'm more on the more inhibited side like more better inhibitory control than not  : no  : uhh like obsessed about things? : yeah sure yeah  : yeah usually i think i'm trying to inhibit is inhibiting distractions so for instance i'll want to you know i'll be working and i have this urge you know to go cut my hair and i'll inhibit it like that what i mean by inhibited there are certainly want to be have impulsive ideas inhibit the impulse because that’s not a good use of my time right now or whatever  : no  : yeah i think that i just well one i think i was more distractible and in part i think that distractibility was just avoidant behavior because i felt so unsure of what i was doing and my ideas and not good enough and i just compared myself a lot to other peoples metric of for instance number of papers you know where which journals people were publishing in and i just started feeling like it wasn’t fun constantly you know socially comparing and all that and i really felt like once i for lack of a better term was vulnerable with my ideas or with my failures and things didn’t work i didn’t get funded i actually felt easier to connect to my other colleagues does that make sense you know like now i'll tell everybody grant number 5 didn’t get funded and that’s fine whereas i used to feel like it mattered to other people when i came to the realization nobody gives a  shit you know nobody cares what you're doing and that’s where earlier you asked me about my parents that’s where they're really helpful in my career inadvertently they that’s they're attitude nobody cares right you're not fired right no that’s okay its okay from their perspective this is all the other the stuff we worry about is trivial compared to having a stable job and having you know good marriage and things like that so that’s how its definitely shifted from social comparison : in terms of what i study yeah i mean yeah i guess i see what you mean yeah certainly i think that i you know when i started working on the adolescent brain i think i was coming from more of a risk model of adolescent the idea i mentioned earlier something is wrong with the brain we just have to find a way to fix it or diminish adolescent behavior during this period of life and now i've really shifted to thinking about from a more adaptive sense that the brain has evolved this way for an adaptive purpose and that’s more interesting thing for me to think about the utility of the adolescent brain and the utility of having these traits during adolescence so just a big shift  : i think just realizing that you know i used to start all of my papers with something along the lines of you know we all know that adolescents are a big problem you know something like that and i realized that’s not true i felt as though i was writing in a cartoonish way about adolescents it was almost i started feeling like embarrassed about it and i realize that that is not actually what i think why am i writing that i'm writing that because i think that’s what is of interest but you know i don’t know : hmm i guess that it brings me so much happiness that its i find it really fun to not know how somethings going to work out and its kind of fun you know especially in the early stages of thinking about something that its kind of like a little secret that i have this little secret that i'm working on it in my head mapping out my brain and so i think that’s what's also been a paradigm shift for me as an academic or a scientist is that i've found what makes me what's fun about it for me and what's fun is the new ideas and the thinking about how that might be applicable to real world problems um so that’s i think that’s an important thing about my creative expression i really kind of need it to be remain interested in my work  : sure : the most proud of hmm probably my children. : just success in terms of how they're turning out or how the success in terms of like my parenting like in my parenting skills? : yeah well i think that i'm most proud of not only deciding to have children but also but actually raising them because then i can have first of all then i have a training to become a role model and also because then i have the opportunity to sort of take my teach them the values that i think are important of them live longer than just me. : probably coming to the us : yeah that was pretty hard : yeah so actually kind of a funny story i didn’t speak any english when i moved here we moved from [city 1] so but i was a pianist and also my math was much more advanced than the high school has to offer so i figured out at some point that what i should do is  somehow like train my math and music and use it skills in exchange for practicing english so i tutored one thing i did i tutored all the like the high school students in math because they were taking calculus bc and they were struggling with it but i was already long done with it and then also one thing that happened that was kind of funny i was practicing piano in the school auditorium and this woman walked at the end i couldn’t understand what she was saying but it must have been something to the effect of like wow like who are you and like how are you practicing like that where did you come from you know and then little but it turns out that was the school orchestra conductor like director of the school orchestra and yeah and so she actually took me to [school of music] and i auditioned and i got a scholarship and so with that she helped me out with lessons because we couldn’t pay for them and that’s why i'm so yeah and so i had to interact i basically put myself in a position where i had to interact with like regular american people instead of doing what most immigrants do which is like they form these mini communities of their own and that just kind of stew in them  : yeah i'm actually a concert pianist i was actually just practicing piano when you called  : so that’s why i couldn’t  : oh yeah for sure  : oh yeah so i am actually so i have a phd right but i did my masters did it in an unusual way most people in engineering at least go to graduate school and then they do the entire 5 years of phd and then they graduate and that’s it i actually broke it up i got my masters first and so what happened was i took a year off between my undergraduate and graduate education and i worked at [company] in you know the big company in [city 2] and i really, really didn’t want to i really enjoyed it there and i didn’t want to move to go to grad school somewhere else i was supposed to go to [university 1] to do polymer physics but i really fell in love with the [city 3] and i ended up going to [university 2] instead for material science which wasn’t my undergrad major my undergraduate major is in calibration engineering but i ended up going to [university 2] for material science because we were working actually together with intel on a material science project and i was working for this advisor well because of the way one of the ways to a masters is a you still do research so you can do a class based masters where you basically take a bunch of classes a little bit like an extension of your undergraduate years but you can also do a masters which is also a precursor to a phd which is what most people do and so i was studying with all my you know i started doing this masters i didn’t mean to get into the masters program i wanted to get into the phd program but my - and so somebody like the department chair made that or maybe i made that misunderstood them but he led me to believe that pretty straightforward to transfer that basically the reason why i got into my masters program was because they didn’t have enough money at that point it is true i mean i applied and like july most people apply in december you know and i waited like several more months to apply so all of their finances had already been allocated but they but my credentials were good enough to get in so then they said you're going to have to pay your way for this so i figured you know i applied for a bunch of fellowships but the i guess interesting part about this was i had an advisor with whom i was doing the research and this other grad student and i basically built an entire diffractometer you know that basically uses x-rays to study various mechanical properties and things so  we built it from scratch and we really learned a lot and i was studying for qualifying exams because i was under the impression that i was going to stay for the whole phd program and so one time i came into work and this guy this advisor guy he was just so you know like 85 years old or something he was very old and crusty and he says well you know intel cut my funding and i was like okay i don’t really know that that means i was 21 whatever and uh i don’t really know what that means but lets go do some research you know and he kind of looked at me and was like i don't think you understand and i was like well what what and he was like you know what that means that is i can't support you anymore and actually i don’t even think you are a good scientist and in general women are cut out to do phds. : yeah so that was a bit of a blow  : so i just kind of stood there and i didn’t quite you know was processing so i didn’t feel too good about myself at that point because you know at that point women we have this tendency to believe what we're told instead of just sort of defending you know so i kind of stood there well maybe i guess maybe i really am a bad scientist you know and like in retrospect i'm like oh geez like that was so awful to like he really put me down yeah so then at that time i was married and my husband was doing a phd at [university 3] so one of us had to work. so then i went back to intel to a different organization within intel and on the promise that i was going to go back and finish my phd someday. so yeah he kicked me out pretty much not kicked me out but basically said look i think we're a bad scientist. yeah so then i worked at intel and then i went and then i got into [university 2] again and this time i felt so much more well i was i didn’t quite know what i wanted to do at this time but i got the most exceptional amazing mentor advisor ever in my phd it was like a tremendous contrast you know compared to what was like before and he really built me back from scratch i would say. he really made me believe in myself the reason why you know the reason why i'm a tenured full professor at [university 4] [section inaudible] its like its all thanks to him he really like pulled me out of it so. his name is [person 1] he's just incredible guy  : oh you mean like how to phrase the question sure : sure well i think that well personally he just set a set a very high personal standard like he you know [person 1] is really famous deal and so when i actually got into [university 2] the second time for my phd i didn’t even bother talking to him because i he was so famous that there was no chance he was going to take me into his group you know and he actually emailed me he sent me a note saying hey [] i just i saw that you were coming back because he knew me from a couple classes from before and he said you know i saw that you were coming back hey i have this project you know would you be interested and i was like "oh!" like i nearly fell out of my chair "oh my god i would bring you coffee if you asked" you know so he's he's just a really really high integrity guy like just a really really high integrity guy and very um very thorough and very scholarly and you just kind of i don’t know like i just felt really - felt first of all i just felt really privileged to be in his group i just felt like oh my god he gave me the benefit of the doubt he took me into his group maybe i'm not so bad after all uh you know. and the second thing is he really treated me with respect like that was i think that was the probably a really big part of it that he i mean now that i'm a professor myself and i graduate a lot of phd students i have a lot of them now in retrospect i was probably very silly. you know all the first-year graduate students are so naïve and so like you kind of look at them you know he never put me down he was never condescending like and he was even though he was so experienced right. i think he gave all of us the benefit like he made us all feel like we were respected and then he would really he would really provide insights about what the experiments meant what the data meant what he would of implied he kind of helped me create a bigger picture this was probably closer towards the end of my phd. in the beginning it was more of - of that you know treating being treated with respect i think first of all he set an incredible personal example because the scholarship and the integrity and the attitude and the hard work and the but at the same time he was very sort of very positive just a very positive inspiring human being you know and then i think that close you know once i starting producing the results and having collecting my own data he really helped my sort of throw in put it together in a context he took me conferences he let me present he just really showed me that i was a colleague in some ways yeah  : oh and he's so nice oh he's also so incredibly nice so incredibly just like i said inspiring he takes his craft very seriously and give these amazing lectures and talks and just really its very rare to be that famous and to not have a lot of enemies so he's like loved by everybody : oh absolutely oh my god that’s the number one thing  : that’s probably why i consider having children to be possibly the most meaningful part of my life because that’s because mentorship in a 100% : wait to my phd students or to my  : well i help them become who they are like i what i enjoy the most is recognizing everybody's unique individual capabilities and them guiding them so they strengthen them guiding their strengths so that they can realize their potential in learning how to work because you know there's different approaches work with different people so learning how to make the most out of their time with me and also helping them find themselves. you know they all come in as students and they come out as scientists we're a little bit spoiled and a little bit lucky at [university 4] we have incredible students they're brilliant and they so i just last year graduated this incredible student he had a first paper in [journal 1] a first paper in [journal 2] another in [journal 3]. he's just like an incredible guy and so - so proud of him just to know that i contributed somehow to that and last year actually my previous graduate student became a faculty member at [university 2]. so she's now a professor at [university 2] you know so those kinds of things absolutely we all kind of live for that moment where the students really get it or the students really kind of understand the start really understanding the scientific process how to become a critical thinker kind of question things how to write well you know all of those and then of course but then you don’t really we don't really get to take too much credit for the ones who come in who are already brilliant. i think probably the most meaningful experiences are those the students come in and they're a little bit naïve and they don’t really know what they want to do or what they're enjoying but then showing them teaching them and showing them how personal research is actually really exciting and how you do research correctly and how you question things and what you trust and what you don’t trust and how you read into the literature and how you work with others and how you make sense of it all and put it into a bigger picture. you know all of those things i feel like that’s my job and that’s my duty why i do need to teach them these things those that come in and don’t quite know what you know i can shape them into real scientist and real critical thinkers by the end by the time they graduate that i really take credit for so that's kind of i had a few of those maybe just a couple of bad apples where it's just like you know what no matter what's happening like no matter what i do they just they just can't quite hold the phd thing but  : no its actually very challenging to tell it’s a special skill and i have a couple of colleagues in my department that i really admire for that ability so what i can do pretty well i can prescreen and i can tell if they're going to work hard and if in general they're inspired and driven. i can certainly do that. what i can't tell is whether or not they are their going to go above and beyond because they all come in and they're all pretty  bright eyed and happy and smart and all that but then but they don’t really like for example my very first phd student who was material science he became a consultant so he works for [company]  and he was he was such a loss to science i can't even tell you because he was incredible like he was really amazing scientist and a really great guy and i was so hoping that he was follow the academic footsteps but he really he was like nope i learned exactly how to solve problems i do it really really well and [company] pays a lot of money so i'm going to do it. so he became a consultant so my very first phd student she actually is a professor at [university 5] so you never really know whether i mean what i can tell right away whether or not they're going to be successful what i can't tell whether or not they'll stay in the field that’s you cant really tell  : well that’s a big part of it its not everything its not everything. no they have to be prepared to try more than once more than twice more than 50 times you might be surprised but there are so many graduate students you don't even know that don't quite do that they don’t understand that like in grad school and in research it actually many many many tries before you succeed and you have to really practice. if something isn't sophisticated by mental procedure you have to really really practice and a lot of them don’t get it they just go try it once and that’s it, you know. or they go and try it and tell me well it didn’t work and then i kind of hit them over the head like uh and you just basically quit at that point you just tried once or twice it doesn’t just work like that that’s not how research works. you know you try  you try you try and eventually it will work and it if doesn’t work by the 100th time then you can tell me it didn’t work. you don’t get to tell me you tried it twice and it didn’t work and um so i can definitely prescreen for that ones who are going to persevere and not give up. but then there's something else there's something special about the ones that are really going to succeed and that’s not something i can put my finger - it's not formulaic there's something there has to be something inspiring about the conversation. you know people have felt they're a little bit quirky really brilliant into some ways, but with that comes a little bit of their uniqueness. so when we have a conversation i always ask them to tell me something unusual about them for example when visitors come to our meeting or when they're new graduate students i ask them to introduce themselves to the whole group and just tell their name and their background where they come from and one unusual thing about themselves. so in you wouldn’t believe people from unicyclists to violinists to you know jugglers and runners and i had one kid in my group who was a national champion of india in rubix cube solving. just like all these yeah they're all crazy amazing things people you know and when you see that kind of a personality you know they are go getter you know they know how to solve problems and kind of know you see the much more complete picture when they share with you something else that’s not just scientific. so yeah i feel like people who are more people who are not passionate about research only but also even with i said research only people who are passionate simply by about what they're going to do in grad school alone but also has something else they drives them those tend to be most successful.  :  yeah like some like i said some of my most successful students they were either they did baja california car or they do ballroom dancing or they do they love being an ra which is a mentor to undergrads or they figure skate or whatever it is but there's definitely - : yeah so they all have that other thing you know the other thing that gives you the sense of discipline and there's a lot of that that has to happen in research and so i feel like you know as a pianist myself i know what its like to practice a lot you know you really really have to practice. so i just feel like when they do something else and they clearly excel at it they know how to be serious about something they're passionate about. : yeah unfortunately i do. yeah i wouldn’t say that its not manifested maybe very strongly but i definitely do. i mean its engineering and science is notorious for not having so many women i mean i've had incredible women graduate students for example like i said my very very first phd graduate woman is a faculty member at [university 5] another one is at [university 2] that’s [person 2] she's completely also a woman i find that women first of all there are few of them like i wish there were more and i really i have this colleague [person 3] who we all jokingly say all the attractive women go to his group which is actually which is only a little bit of an exaggeration because that’s exactly what happens. i really try to nucleate a seed in mine and now so i have a group of about 30 so i have about 27 phd students and 3 postdocs and out of those 8 or no 7 i'm sorry i don’t know at the top of my head 7 or 8 are women you know. it doesn’t really have i mean i have a research group that is actually fantastic but in general as you think about it its not a lot and you know i'm obviously a woman in science i can't tell you how many times i've given seminars in a room full of men. and it was you know and its um like i've had a joke with all the audiences i always tell them you know its like "what did you do with all the women" you know and they're always like "oh yeah they're working hard". i hope it’s a pretty significant it’s a problem in our society except we just the scientific fields especially ones that are applied physics or engineering some kind of technical  type of a pursuit there we don’t have as many women as would be nice you know and in grad school you know the what i do know for sure is that they are just as capable wait women are just as capable as they guys. but some some of them uh i just want  to say they give in too easily. like they experience they know going into a scientific discipline they know that there's probably going to be its going to be challenging and that its going to be a little they're going to possibly have to work extra hard to be heard in all that but i definitely sense that they tend to shy away. i don’t know they tend to shy away from confrontations and being challenged. and i think that i understand its not comfortable feeling in you know but when you go to a conference so one of my graduate students had this experience this is a woman [person 4]. remember i told you about this brilliant guy that just graduated yeah his name is [person 5] and then [person 4] was his - the two of them were working together on his really advanced thing two different aspects about it but this one thing and they would go to conferences and when somebody would ask a question and [person 4] would answer they would just kind of dismiss her answer and when the same question you know [person 5] would answer and he had a very its true he had a very authoritative voice everybody listened to him and she came to me in exasperation actually a few times she was like i don’t understand why this is happening can you help like what's going on. you know and i did a little bit i actually i do a lot of mentoring of that kind of stuff because that’s really i feel like that’s where i need to insert myself and like really explain this to her. yeah so i tend to i'm noticing women are more timid and this a huge over exaggeration you know but they do seem to be more timid in terms of trusting themselves, and maybe not as confident and uh and i wish that they weren't i wish that wasn't the case  : well you know sure i'd be happy to share that you can't decouple advice from what from her from that person as opposed to the advice i would give to women  : in general i mean [person 4's] it was a specific person [person 4] right so then so even though i gave her advice particular advice it wouldn’t necessarily applicable to all women but i generally say is something along the lines of don’t give them the power to make you feel bad.  : having gone through the experience myself when i was called a bad scientist i really kind of really stand up also for all women scientists. and i much explain to them that a lot of the time the challenging questions either come from a true scientific place in which case they really cant take it personal. you know i'm also noticing that women take things a lot more personally often when in a conference setting or in a scientific setting when they're giving a talk like that when somebody asks a scientific question i've noticed that women tend to get more defensive instead of just addressing the science and i don’t know if it’s the emotional part or whatever it is. yes i always teach them you know just answer the question don’t worry about it and don’t overthink it you know. if somebody asks a question then just answer that scientific question focus on the science. and second thing i say if it's clear somebody is really trying to put you down like i've definitely when i was a grad student go to conferences and i remember this guy really well some random european guy told me "you know you're just here because you're a girl". you know what are you going to do, and being an idiot those kind of things and i kind of explained to them look there will be always be people like that and you're above that like i just do the whole inspirational talk you know they want to be a jerk that their choice but that’s not your problem you need to be above that focus on the science and you know don’t take it personally and don’t give them the power to make you feel bad even if it hurts or even if it kind of when you what you're experiencing is clearly negative and that you're feeling being put down. if you hold yourself you know with dignity and you respond to the scientific part and ignore the other part you will come up ahead, you know. and that’s everything that i say always make sure to imagine that person naked so you know make fun of them (both laugh) : yeah that’s tough because that’s also so somebody you mean lets say like a first year graduate student or colleague? : yeah you know for this question it might be better to for me to describe what advice would give to the young faculty members not to the graduate students yeah because i'm a full professor right but when professors usually come in as an assistant professor and then they have to work their butts off to become tenured. and so i think its much more and plus they are usually older and they usually have families so private life you know when you're a grad student you're its not as important to balance your personal life and your professional life because you can always choose whatever balance you want because you usually don’t have a family. but as an assistant professor you know i do mentor a lot of assistant professors as well and that’s tough because i feel like because its very stressful i think what i always well and also in particular women i always suggest that before um so if you have family like for example when i got to [university 4] i was 4 months pregnant with my oldest daughter. but uh - but a lot of the professors assistant professors who come in either just had a baby or have maybe a toddler and a baby and then they go crazy because its just really hard and they are working so much. and so i what use to tell my particular friend is this when you leave work and you walk over to pick up your kids because you know in families with kids because when that clock strikes 5:30 doesn’t matter how much of an inspiring - how inspiring of an conversation you're having or how amazing of an article you're reading that you have to drop everything and go pick up your kids you know. and so its very disruptive to your like day its um its once you you're in the mommy mode its great right because then you're a mommy once you're in the professor mode its also great. it’s the concept switching of context that’s hard you know and so what i always would advise is that you know walk take 10 minutes to walk to the daycare or to drive to wherever it is. basically give yourself that transition time so that you're not ramming from one mode of being like a professor into a  mommy mode because then they get its an explosion the job is pretty stressful having kids is pretty stressful right. so if you give yourself 10 to 15 minutes to i mean i rollerblade everywhere so that me time 10-15 minutes to walk to rollerblade to drive whatever it is and then in your mind close your day. like close your professional day after the kids okay this is what i get after the kids go to bed i'm going to do things a b and c and i always have three things actually i still have this. i always do three things after the kids go to bed and like these three things can be finish a paper finish a proposal respond to somebody etc. 3 defined things that you're gonna do after they go to bed because that gives you like the it gives you the closure for the day it gives you like the acceptance yes you have to accept that your day just ended. like there's 83 thousand things to do you give yourself permission to finish your day and then because you've identified the things you're going to work on you don't feel so overwhelmed so then you really have to be a mommy for a while life you know if you have a partner then you kind of really have to do the you can't pass the family thing too many relationships get destroyed you know i mean i got divorced a lot of friends did too and several of my colleagues you know its a huge strain in a relationship. so if you cant work together its not going to get any better being a faculty member is very very stressful for the family so i mean unfortunately i'm a bad example here because i don’t i still haven't figured it out yet. but i think communicating is probably very important i think its very important to show your kids that you are fully their mom when they are with you. you know because they just grow up too fast and then your time with them you know so i definitely would recommend that not cutting corners. and then after they go to bed go back to those three things the problem is that you'll be exhausted but that's part of the game you know. yeah so that's what i would say. we're juggling if you're doing if like don't try to multifunction if like uh the example i have is the rollerblading some rollerblades that i made are also shoes and so like you can slip into the boot and you slip the boot into the blade and then you like blade and then you get to some building and then you just take off the wheels and you walk around well you know what those things are bad rollerblades and they're are bad shoes because things are not meant to be like that you they should be either rollerblades or shoes you know. and that's kind of why i broke too you have to really separate the two personas in your mind and like your mind gets a chance to kind of transition to one to the other you give it enough of a chance you're going to be better off in both actually then then they'll have a positive sort of interference constructive interference effect. : you mean ah hold up those are more specific : okay but that suggests these are young people or assistant professors : oh okay well okay i'll do the assistant professor too certainly, certainly don’t overwhelm your social life because that gonna that’s going to what tends to happen is when they first start out is that they get so excited about every invitation to go give a talk for example and this is sort of a mix social it’s a professional social interaction but it still matters - you really need to visible before tenure you have to travel a lot and you have to you know travel to places and give talks and go to conferences. but the problem is that if you agree to every single time every single thing that you get invited to you're going to get burnt out and so you have to build this stamina and ration your invitations such that you don’t burn yourself out. so the way it works is that you have to seven years i believe what happens is that at the end of your fifth year you submit your practice at the end of your sixth year they tell you the outcome and then you have one more year to find a job if you didn’t make it. so basically by the end of your sixth year you know the outcome of your tenure case right so that means that for five years straight you have to really really work your butt off and if you do every if you have a spike in productivity in the first year and the second year you'll just burn out so you have to really balance your social context, your - the specialization has to come right away because that’s what you're going to get tenured on so generally speaking you are not advised to take too many risks before tenure. so maybe you would want to have two solid projects that are in your area, you know. and you have to be laser sharp making an impact in those areas where the people are really going to know you they're going to know your work and they're going to write the letters on your behalf saying that the impact of your work that you're the best at what you do you can possibly have one more project on the side that’s a little unusual that’s a little different but you have to have a full understanding that you're not going to dedicate too much of your resources to that project. because you just cant really build - huh so when you first start out you can switch fields a little bit but you know you have to really your name has to become a household name in the specific area that you're in. and that’s hard to do if you are starting from scratch so you have to really really publish you have to fly out give talks and for that people have to know who you are to invite you right so its usually very common to start from fresh completely a new field when you are an assistant professor like i said you need to be to earn that recognition right away. but after tenure and that’s the exactly the opposite once you've earned tenure that’s when people start taking risks that’s when you have finally relax and work on whatever the heck you want so for specialization you really have to do it right away and you have to really build up your reputation build up your name and become visible and like i said the way to do it is by basically focusing a lot of your efforts on something that’s different from your phd work because you'll get penalized for that. but you know it has to be distinct from what you did in your phd from your advisors currently doing. but it has to be your own independent thing but it has to be where you already have a little bit of a reputation established and then like i said for the social thing i would say its too easy to get burnt out because our job requires a lot of thinking. and a lot of thinking and planning and sort of creating a line of thought where you say well i'm going to try this - you create hypothesis or multiple hypothesis or ideas you know say well i'm going to do this maybe i'll try that you know there are so many things to try that it’s a little - that its easy to lose track or what is worth trying, you know. you should always ask yourself a question "just because i can do this should i do this", you know. right so that’s also something an assistant professors kind of tend to struggle with so i always yeah again i always encourage them to pick like the two or three really cool ideas like they i mean cool what i mean is something they're inspired about they still have to two out of those three have to still be within the realm of what you're already doing so they're certainly creative and they're certainly innovative they just can't be like if you are a material scientist and you are studying solids you can't all of a sudden go and like study fluid flow in a waterfall like that’s just silly idea because well because you're just not going to be able to build your name and to get as much impact or to you know create as much impact in something that unfamiliar to you but if you're a material scientist and you're always you've always studied nanomaterials that are that have a particular atomic level micro structure i would absolutely encourage them to go beyond that to expand beyond that particular structure maybe go to different experimental setup maybe go to a different set of materials maybe go to a different problem attack a different problem or something like that it has to be something within you know that global general area and then for the third project that can be a really that can be something that sort of indulge yourself yeah. : so you can get tenured  : and make an impart in my particular line of work its actually when you first start out as an assistant professor all you see is tenure like you cant see beyond that you only after tenure you start caring about the department start caring about the university about your colleagues beyond that but its just like when you first start out you see this see big big thing that’s looming over you that’s says tenure  : yeah so really have to that’s your basically one major evaluation. like in our line or work after tenure you can be - i mean you eventually will become a full professor hopefully will get into the national academy of sciences or there will certainly be some other tokens of recognition. but without tenure you cant get any of it its like a qualifier, you know. once you get tenure you know you qualified to remain that for the rest of your life so its kind of a really big deal  : uh well i would say i really love doing what i do and i really love my students so i get really inspired by the stuff that they do. um in many ways they drag me - they really lift me up like sometimes sometimes its easy to get down on what on the research that you're doing you know this is now i've done it for 10 years i've been doing this certainly the longest job i've ever had. and we work on a variety of different projects from batteries and and energy storage to biomedical devices to fundamental physics to so many different things. and they are all exciting in their own right but you know there are 30 students which means there are 30 projects. so it’s a little hard to me to just constantly be excited so what i really enjoy so i spend every afternoon meeting with my students. i protect my mornings to do my actual work to do my thinking to do my proposals to do my you know write ups whatever it is that i have to do and then i meet in the afternoons i always meet with students and with colleagues mostly with students so when they update on their projects i definitely get really inspired it sort of reinvigorated about the stuff that we're doing. that my group is doing. : sure of course : i try to graduate them faster yeah. when it became this definitely happens when it becomes clear either the project is not going anywhere or what you have hypothesized wasn’t correct or the measurement or the experiment that it would require is just far too sophisticated for any reasonable amount of time for a graduate student to carry out, then it becomes to clear to me that its time to just move on you know it’s a human being so i can't just like drop them i can't drop the project. and so what i tend to do i lead them to a point of closure maybe more in a more accelerated way than i would than in a project that’s ongoing through maybe a couple of generations of grad students. so i and that’s something that’s actually pretty common and in my group maybe to like in fact now i have this brilliant student who is working on bone on properties of bone. and what happened was that the source of funding that i had for that particular project it go cut off for whatever reason that particular project was gone, you know. but i have to support him for one more year so i'm just trying to so basically that showed me that we're not really going to be working on bone much beyond the student and so i'm seeing him through and so when he graduates that project will graduate with him  : yeah luckily like even if i become for whatever reason disinterested or not able to do this research anymore or not you know - and again in our line of work its very much linked to the grants and to the proposals so the success - you know if you don’t get some proposal funded that you're not going to work on that idea. its just i mean it would be hard to work on that idea because then you won't have a student or dedicated person working on it  : hmm my family being my parents like my family when i was a child? : oh they really helped me my dad has they helped me in a very different way so my dad is really driven he's a bit of a workaholic himself. and he's very competent and very stoic. he's like a true [country] guy you know he's works a ton and he takes a lot of pride in his work and he definitely definitely instilled that sense of pride in me, and i definitely the working hard part  i would say really comes from him and the ying its like the ying and the yang and then with my mom she she's the one who really disciplined with me with the piano. she's the one who uh made me practice and she's the one who basically put in all the ethical not that my dad didn’t but she's the one who really said "look you when you're doing something you either do it well or don’t bother doing it at all". its really important whatever you do has to be high quality you know and there's no half assing so id say it was that you know they certainly enabled me to have these incredible opportunities in life and unfortunately the big burden on my shoulders to this day my mom brings up she's like you know move to america for you so you can have a great life and you can have a great career and want you to be stuck in [country] anymore you know i have a brother too how about you delocalize you know the responsibilities so its just not on my shoulders and they said you know like he was too young at the time we could see that you were going to go far somewhere in life so we wanted you to have the opportunity so they done a lot for me and they certainly enabled me to go to [university 6] and to have this great life and to become who i am today. so they - yeah i would absolutely i absolutely that’s a significant factor in who i was there also there's one more thing and i'm not sure if its like together or not its more for the psychologist for you guys you know they are pretty hands off. they very rarely told me what to do and still you know just because i know from my friends they have a lot of my friends have these parents who say things like "i want you to do this" or "i'd like you to do this" or "make sure you do this" and they are in some ways they always maintain this child parent relationship - hierarchy i was born when my parents were very young they were 21 and 23. and so i mean that was common in [country] in that time and they are still i mean like imagine i cant imagine but when i was 21 and 23 i could not possibly imagine taking care a newborn. we're just not mature enough and i think because they kind of learned how to be parents with me and they were so young and they had to give up a lot and sacrifice a lot it built a different - like i feel like i was more of the like they weren't these wise you know mature parents like they became when my brother was growing up he's 8 ½ years younger than me but with me they were trailblazers they were kind of learning the gig of being parents, you know. and i think that brought in i think the perseverance the discipline whenever the parents are young and they get exasperated more easily they have more energy they there's - you know when people are younger they have more energy for the good and the bad and the ugly all of it so i just feel like i had a really intense life you know and i think it i’m a pretty intense person now i think it rubbed off. : oh that’s a tough one do you mean my ex-husband or my current one : sure  : yeah uh it’s a little easier probably better about for me to talk about my children. its um having children really put meaning into my life, because my firstborn when i first showed up at [university 4] as an assistant professor and then i had the second one two years after that and it was definitely very hard but all of a sudden its like oh somebody really needs me. like it was this incredible sense of being need and being loved no matter what that kind of brought that part that i think was missing. i don’t think i had a really good relationship before or just it wasn't i guess it wasn’t as fulfilling as i was hoping for whatever it was, you know because my job i’m definitely very passionate about the science that i do i'm also very passionate about the piano and it took until i had kids that i had felt complete. i think in some ways they still do this day inspire me i really spend a lot of time with them and i really get to know them and i really value that, you know. its one thing to mentor phd students its an amazing it’s a fascinating process especially because you know they had of have to listen to me versus my children don’t my actual genetic children don’t you know. and that kind of makes the whole process a little bit more frustrating and a little bit also a little bit more fascinating because they are a part of me you know i actually learned so much about mentoring about parenting becoming a parent. i learned so much about how to treat my grad students in fact i hope you don’t share this with anybody i use a lot of parenting techniques to interact with the grad students and i think i'm a better advisor for that because you now they teach you for the kids you know you have to validate their feelings, like i really like a really bad thing to do as a parent if a child comes to you and says you know this really hurts and you say well here's a band aid. you solve a problem with them being compassionate or like they come and they say i don’t want to wear a jacket because its hot outside and you say how can you say such a thing its not hot its cold and like you immediately invalidate their perspective right. and so i've learned to be to emphasize first and then to also be aware that i don’t immediately shoot you know shoot them down by saying something like no what you're saying is invalid, you know. i mean its silly these are just like silly examples but that’s sort it’s the premise of all human interactions in all the so my kids definitely inspire me because you know i've learned to be patient, i've learned to accept sometimes they wont listen to you and that’s okay and some way, and they taught me that just saying words you know just telling them what to do is not necessarily going to work and you know that's you know these are all important skills running a research group because i think that when we are young when we start out we hold everybody to the same standard as you hold yourself to and um that’s easier said than done. especially like i said every graduate student requires a different approach. different things make them click with you and different things make them work hard you have to find that thing first, you know. and i think we all come in sorta thinking that okay i'm just going to run this project so i'm just going to tell them what to do and they're going to do it  well no it turns out that there is conflict there are misunderstandings or when you say something to them in this thing and they say to you this other thing you know and boy they are bad writers when they first start out. you really need to teach them how to write yeah so i think that i think it's very important to have a family where you're not the boss, you know. and that’s kind of a even if you are still not the same way i think it’s a humbling experience its also a very rewarding experience sometimes they do amazing things for you and they say amazing things and like to watch them develop as human beings and also your relationship develops they're growing up. and its very similar in some ways to how the graduate students evolve as well as they become more mature as they go from 21 to 26 they are still growing up you know and when they come they are these bright eyed brilliant little students you know and when they come out they come out these pretty mature scientists and so that transformation is similar to watching your children grow up, you know. and so like i call them my academic children versus my actual children you know i also tend to be tougher with my own children i think that’s something i can probably work on. it's hard for me - i get frustrated more easily so that yeah they teach me all the skills that practice on the academic children i need to be better with the genetic ones  : my brother is not so much no we're very different he very much a 9 to 5er who doesn’t really-he's a great guy he's just a pretty simple great guy like he has they also had a baby pretty so i have am 11 month old baby and they have in theirs is 6 weeks younger than that so he got married and he has a kid now and he has a 9 to 5 job and i'm really happy for them that’s basically it. my dad is really creative. i would say but he yeah he's pretty creative he used to be i think that life really kind of beaten him just beaten him into the ground especially after we moved to the states but he used to play guitar and he used to go biking on these giant cross country trips with his friends he used to do ballet he used to do a lot of things and so i think that that's really sort of shaped him as to be this multi colored multi faceted person. whereas my mom has always been the caretaker and so she's you know unfortunately i don’t want it to be the stereotype but like she's one of those overworked very, very exhausted moms who has she basically had to take care of the household and of us while my dad worked. she has a masters in mechanical engineering she was never really all that excited about her career i feel like she was just kind of working to keep the family going, you know. but then when my brother was born she basically stopped working and she hasn't really she's very passionate about what she does she reads a lot she has a lot of hobbies you know she doesn’t really - i don’t think that career ever became one of her hobbies because she was always the main caretaker and unfortunately that takes sacrifice  : my brain : ohh yeah all of it oh you know what its all of it like everything that you mention i mean it most certainly builds on the previous work for the existing work i mean how can it not. you have to i mean the thing is before you can be creative you kind of have to have a command of the language at least command of the field that you're working in so you kind of have to know the basics at least right so in many ways it does build upon the work that you know i've already done or my colleagues have done or know about um reading the literature gives you the state of the art it gives you the layout of of what's already known what hasn’t been tapped into, and then they way you know the actual idea creation process - i don’t really know. i just come up with them and uh i come up with cool things to try um when i hear oh i can tell you this i often get new ideas when i hear other people present seminars. so when i go to conferences or when i go to talks i think it because it allows me to transcend from my daily life and daily responsibilities so i don’t have thing constant next thing in my head you know like oh my god now i have to do this and now i have to do this and i have to do that you know i feel like when you have that constant background noise so to speak its hard to be creative. and so what i do is i intentionally put myself in situations where i'm detached from that so i mentioned that i rollerblade to work and to school and to my workout gym and everywhere. so that's my time to create really and its my time to think in an unobstructed way and so i come up with a lot of ideas to try when i rollerblade and then when i go to conferences again you're taking out of your normal daily routine you're able to relax you know that okay i don’t have to put the kids to bed tonight or okay i don’t have to plan dinner, i don’t have to do this - then you can really think you can really clear your mind so when i hear good speakers and even bad speakers that it gives me a, it gives me uhh cool ideas to try. um and uh to try to pursue you know maybe its not working- because you know its hard to tell, when you come up with an idea, its hard to tell how much of an investment it will be in terms of resources in terms of your own, your own thinking, and in terms of graduate students, so actually this just happened recently. somebody approached me and said "you know we have this problem and there's actually a law suit going out so can you help us solve this", and i was like "what?" so it kind of, i looked more deeply into it and its actually kind of an exciting project now, so we are working on it.  : yeah so sometimes, sometimes you just come up with an idea when you were thinking very intensely about something uhh that you already are doing and then a new idea pops up. sometimes you get it from interacting with other people how present , maybe one particular problem to you, but you build upon that. um, and sometimes like i said going to the seminars or lectures or conferences really helps because it's placed into context and so you can really kind of take shape, the idea can take its own direction from there. : of course, that happens after tenure. that happens to everybody actually, but it’s a little bit of an anti climactic situation because its really, because you no longer have that one goal that you're working towards. and you can work on anything you want and all of a sudden you're like "oh my god, what should i do?" because there are so many things that i could do but i just don't know which one thing, like because you have to focus so intensely for a long time on this one thing, that it's very, you become a little bit drunk on that freedom. : hmm that's a good question, how do i decide what to do? well in many ways it depends on the funding. so in our line of work like say i come up with 12 ideas or whatever it is, you know usually you write, just an idea is usually not enough to materialize so you kind of have to put that idea to words and then submit it to some kind of an agency that's presumably going to sponsor you. so if you get that funding it makes it easy to decide. you know if you don't get that funding, but you still like the idea, then you pitch it somewhere else. so i would say in our line of work it really just depends on the grant. um but that's not everything you know there's certainly ideas that even if you don't have funding for you can try. and then what i do is i decide by seeing how much i can persuade my graduate students to try. so because by that time, because that's sort of the way that i can convince myself that it's worthwhile. so say you come up with an idea and its kind of a crazy one and its not certainly no where near the maturity level that it takes to write a proposal on it, but i kind of want to try it. i would sort of think while we are all waiting, about which one or two graduate students would be best at it and then i have a little conversation with them and then i try to sell the project to them. and then i say "well i have this idea i haven't really thought through, like what happens, what if you were to try to do this and make a sample this way and try it this way, because then if we do that we find out this and that without the constraints of these other things." i don't know i'm just making this up. and if they seem like "oh yeah that's a great idea!" and they want to try it, then we kind of all mutually inspire each other. but if i see sort of this glazed look and they're all like "okay sounds good" you know then i'm like okay i guess this is back in the corner. yeah so its very much a feedback process you know. i find that by trying to convince others that the idea is cool, like sharing the idea, and trying to convince others that its cool, usually is what i sort of, i get jazzed about things when i, when people reciprocate you know and i feed off- i like, i'm the kind of person who shares the energy and people feed off of it and i have a need for that energy, you know to take that back as well. : also a good question. uh they're both quite important actually. i think in the beginning when you're younger its probably a little wiser to go with rationality, but when you uh when you become more mature or more senior, there is a lot to be said for your intuition because you've done the young thing and you've worked really hard and you've worked with managers, you've worked with agencies, so you become much more aware of what types of ideas are going to be successful and what types aren't. and so sometimes you know it's hard to put your finger on it, and sometimes its hard to know the details, but you kind of have a feel-like you have an intuition about trying something that possibly is going to work and i find that now you know, after 10 years of working i feel i have a better sense of what ideas will fall and which wont and also which ideas will be more interesting to work on and sort of others that will be turning the crank kind of thing.  i don't like doing the end plus first thing, i like doing the first thing you know and they're saying you can be either first or best, that's what bill nix taught me and i think i would rather be first than best. i think i'd rather come up with a cool idea and try it out and show that it can be done and then to have other groups follow us and do it better.  um and its also, the example is that many academic people in engineering will experience this. so say you come up with an idea and then you try it out and then you publish your first paper or you share at a conference, before you know it there's like an army of german researchers that are all repeating what you did on materials a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h. this is how a lot of people- it's like if you come up with the methodology or you come up with a neat you know, a research strategy, they absolutely copy cat you and then, except they do it in like a hundred different permutations because they sort of don't really have as many- well this is a personal opinion. it seems that in the german universities they don't have as many ideas of their own, but rather they kind of mooch off of our, the u.s. ideas, and then they beat it to death. they do it you know as many possible experiments as they can. so there's merit to both things. but the original ideas usually come from the u.s.  : oh my gosh, now with the baby? or before? : no not too bad, between, around 6.  : both. : yeah the baby now sleeps through the night. yeah thank you, we trained him. um yeah if i can do something like midnight to 6 or midnight to 7 i'm totally happy, midnight to 7 would be better. : it used to be that i was a total night owl and i used to work like i had some kind of clarity starting at 9pm from 9pm until about 1 am i was a torpedo, i could do like anything. and then now a days it's more in the morning. i'm definitely shifting, i find that i'm a lot more productive between 7am and maybe 1pm which is when i start, this is when everybody starts falling asleep. that’s' usually when i meet with my students because i'm already sort of in that secondary phase where i'm perfectly happy being productive to guide the students but maybe not so much to do intense work on my own.  : well i write a proposal, so that's what i was saying before, so in our line of work first i try to sell the idea to the students, if the students are enthusiastic about it and it seems like a worthy pursuit then i will write a proposal, and then send either to a department of defense agency, or to a department of energy, or to the national science foundation or the national association of health, so those are all common. um and then well i also need to figure out if i'm going to need to work with others. it’s a balance you know, you don't just write proposals on a single pi you usually collaborate with others, in fact i just submitted a proposal two days ago and it was with a sub contract at [university 6], and i just now, right now am trying to put together a team for this special call that came out that has people from [university 7] and a person from [university 2] and myself, so that takes a lot more effort and a lot more coordination when you have multiple people. : what? : yeah no, i definitely create some kind of a map. or i would say i create some kind of a structure, it's usually 3-dimensional. so i create some kind of a sub structure or a structure to try out the idea.  : no, no i usually, well because its not like-it doesn’t just happen just one idea right. like i usually have a few and then some of them i might be thinking more in depthly about some others but by the time, you kind of push them forward, so i either write the proposals and they either get funded so then we start working on them so they usually transition from being an idea to being a project. um you know but the ones that were there before don't disappear and you know i build upon them and i develop those more, and so its like i'm constantly incubating things.  : well do you count thinking as scientific work? : oh i see, okay uhh. probably i'm doing scientific thinking about 80% of the time and maybe i do everything else- because its in the background a lot. like when i'm rollerblading i'm thinking about it, when i practice piano even i think about it, when i walk somewhere i think about it, when i listen to something- its always there, like its, i think i can only really turn it off when i'm with my children.   : yeah, because that's what we call intuition. i think that creating my ideas helps when you have a good sense of intuition for what's important and what will be novel and what new things to try. so and you kind of can't have that intuition, you can't have developed that intuition unless you have worked on many, many things like that before. so you have a breath of experience. you know you sort of can't come into a new field or be a novice and then be like "oh i have this fantastic idea why don't we try that!" like no one is going to take you seriously. you know, so you have to have some sense for what you're going to try. i mean it's one thing to be creative and its another thing to be sort of crazy. so you can come up with a ton of crazy ideas but they're not necessarily going to be creative. so i feel like to have a creative idea you kind of need to really know the state of the art, and the best way to know the state of the art is by contributing to it. so you have to be aware of all the things done before and all the tings currently being done, and also maybe you're one of the players and are doing one of those things as well, so once you know the lay of the land you're that much more able to identify what things are worth pursuing. : oh, constantly. oh my god, yeah we're constantly revising. a part of our job, it's not like a doctor- so you go in you do your thing and then when you go home you're done. you know its very very different from that. so in our line of working you're constantly thinking about it, like it's, you can't really decouple, you can't not be thinking about it. you may not be thinking about something specific. you can think about it more intensely or less intensely, but you are always thinking about it. like it's always in the background you know and like i said, the only times when i'm to really thinking about it is when i'm interacting, and actively interacting with somebody, and especially when i'm taking care of my kids of course they take up all the, all the brain power and everything. um but yeah when i'm thinking, it may not even be something that's top grade but it's something like "okay how is it that we should do it like this or maybe try that or maybe if like we could turn it around like this maybe that will work better" you know but yeah it's constant revision and often rethinking you know because we are also trying things out and as you try things out you can come up with different approaches or different ways to do it so you would say "why don’t you try it like this?" and actually um very often when i'm interacting with my students and i have these daily afternoon meetings with them that's when i come up with more um ideas, more creative ideas, because of building upon what they've already done, so i use that and take that as feedback. : you don't. no i would say there are chapters and that’s when you write scientific papers right. um when you have a story to tell it's pretty, it's not that hard to figure out. when there's a story that has a definite message in it you know so you put a lot of work into it and then you got to some kind of a point where you can say "oh okay this makes sense," and we can do a logical flow from why we you know were motivated for this research, and this is why we did it and this is what we learned from it, and this is the implications at that point you're fine to write a paper. so usually one paper, like usually a real journal and scientific paper is a good indicator that you're done with one part you know, eventually you're never really done with one phenomenon, like you can never be done fully. usually one paper brings in even more questions but that particular chapter is done so basically everything that we do, are chapters in a book and there's a progression. and the more you know about it, the more experienced you become so you know what better things to try and what other questions to answers and that’s independent of one another.   : oh absolutely, there's so much memory, well it all is a part of the experience so i remember how to do many of these things and i remember what worked and what didn't work. so when a new student starts off a project or has an idea and want's to pursue something i absolutely link together what we did before or what we learned before. maybe on a different materials system, or in a different circumstance, but oh that’s a huge part of it : yeah actually i kind of do. like it may not be such a humble thing to say. i kind of do, i feel like i'm very quick, like i connect things very quickly, i don't know i always see patterns everywhere. even in life, like i enjoy that, i enjoy recognizing patterns i enjoy doing puzzles like i enjoy recognizing patterns and i think it's the same, its somehow satisfying, and the same thing in my work. so say for example i remember 6 years ago we did this one thing and now somebody is trying to do a different thing that has elements of it, i recognize that connection very quickly so that at least to me i recognize very quickly so then i try to tie those things together. so obviously graduate students say a fourth year graduate student would've never known the student who graduated six years before him or her. i mean they may have read the paper but at that point its just another piece of literature. but so because i'm the common denominator at least within my group, i see those connections very readily and also just because i'm familiar with the literature within the field like i'm usually the first one to say "oh didn't this another group do something like that but its a little different?" and then my students would say "yeah its a little different, it was different in this way and it was similar in this way and then we kind of go through it." but i'm usually the first one to recognize that connection. : i'm both. there are definitely times- there are definitely times where i absolutely can't focus at all, and there are definitely times when nothing can break my concentration and that's, i-i sort of crave those because it's a little more, we all become a little more distractible with children, so it's a little hard to focus. and so now my days are so short well because also because the new baby too, so what i find is that i am able to focus more intensely but for shorter periods of time, yeah.  : um, no not yet. : no i'm definitely uninhibited. yeah : uninhibited. : uh well okay so i tend to be impulsive but then i don't act upon the impulse as much as i used to. i used to be very much, i used to be very much an instant gratification person, like when i came up with an idea i had to try it right away. or like when we're or if we're driving and stopping i'd be like really thirsty i'd be like okay i've had enough, and just get out of the car and go get a drink, something like that. so yeah, i'm definitely an immediate person like i want to try things right away. when i come up with something new and i get excited about it i want to try it very quick. but the difficult part- the thing is its very easy for me to break out of-i mean the one thing that i think inhibits any kind of innovation, is drowning in the daily routine like just drowning. but the thing is that, we have a lot of kids to go to, like we have 5 kids and they all do their own activities and i do the piano thing and i also serve as an advisor to women engineers, and i also play- sorry i must have mentioned that already- and i also go to this workout studio, so like so many things happen to me during the day that it's very easy to not drown in the routine. its not like i go to work and then i come home spend two hours with my kid and then go to bed. like my life is really really not like that, because it is so enriched, through these various different channels and i have so many interactions with different people that its very easy to be uninhibited, or maybe it's my personality, yeah. : no. : uhhh you mean if i were to, would i have to still get tenured? : yeah. well i think, well hold on are you sort of asking me from the wisdom and experience of my years i guess now what would i have done differently in retrospect? or are you asking how would i have worked different towards tenure if i were to start now as the person i am now. : yeah definitely, i mean i think i'm a lot more relaxed. i think everyone's maybe stressed out and nervous when they first start out because you don't know if you're going to succeed- and it's a huge thing. like not getting tenured in fact one of my colleagues just recently didn't get tenured and it's a really big deal, like it's really, it sent a huge shock wave through the whole university, and i mean that person's career is kind of ruined i mean, not ruined, but i mean they can certainly find another job for sure and many people don't get tenured at places like [university 6] and [university 4] and can easily find an academic position in a maybe different school, but, it's a huge strike to your pride and to your, i mean it's a huge huge downer, i can't find, don't have a better way to put it. so yeah of course everybody really works hard, everybody really busts their butts. everybody, and also because you never know how much is enough. and i know for sure this happened to me that i didn't know whether - when to stop. i didn't know whether it was enough and i didn't know because no one really tells you. everybody says its about impact, well how the heck do you measure impact? like is 70 publications enough or not enough? is when you win 7 awards good enough or not good enough? its just very nerve wracking and so now i'm much more relaxed about these things because personally i don't have to get tenured anymore and also you realize it's not worth it, you just burn yourself out and when you burn yourself out you become a bad everything. a bad mentor, a bad professor, a bad mom, a bad partner, like it's just, but it's hard to recognize it when you're in the throws of it, you know. so i think, i think that as you grow up and mature in this career you exchange some of your energy, the useful energy that you had for the experience, so you don't try, you don't do as many failed attempts or you don't do you're not as exasperated and you're constantly doing this, i call it this tossing and turning. so you're constantly trying things out and you're constantly doing something and you're able to in your place have an experience, because you've done those things and when that happens it allows you to, more easily um get away from the daily sort of mundane tasks that don't lead to anywhere-oh much more importantly i forgot to mention , it gives you the permission to say no. so once you're tenured you don't have to do all the invitations. like i now probably get about 100 invitations per year to go give seminars, talks or lectures or stuff like that, and i probably maybe agree to 16. at that point its just like it's not worth it. at that point its really evaluating is this meaningful, because you no longer have to, and so it creates a much better structure, a much more - it creates much more meaningful experiences.  : oh my gosh, no pressure. : what is important? : okay well you know i'm not sure if this is connected or not. but i think that i maybe- i don't want to call myself a control freak, but i think maybe wanting to be in charge, is maybe a part of it. i notice i don't work very well when somebody tells me what to do. like i don't and like i really really don't work well with that, i really don't. so when i'm going into this situation where it's like- it's weird to put in words- when i feel i'm threatened and it doesn't have to be a threat from um, like not an actual literal threat, when i feel like i'm free to express myself i'm much more creative and much more- i just feel like the creative process when you feel free and unthreatened at least for me, really really works. like when i still when i'm rollerblading i'm free from all sorts of burdens. even if i'm going from my workout class to work, during that 20 minute roller blade, no one can bother me . do you see what i mean? i feel like its mine- i think i belong to myself. and so to me, it's very, it really creates a bad environment for me and i certainly don't - i'm certainly not as creative when i'm burdened by either- you know sometimes even the kids get to me, or other people, or social applications, or like- when i feel like i'm not, like i don't belong to myself but there are all these other things i have to attend to, i get irritated. so then that it really inhibits my creative process. well its really also because right now well you know i interact with a lot of people at work, and i interact with a lot of people at home. so it's those rare opportunities when i don't interact with anybody and like i love my mornings where i have 2 hours to just, to edit a student's paper, to think about things, i love those- if i get those 2 hours that's really special to me. and that when i feel really create- you know i think it's the, knowing that no one is going to bother you for a little while is almost like a high, yeah. : thank you. : so even when anything goes onward would you call and let me know? because i'm definitely interested. : i was going to say i know we are both probably tired.  : how interesting. : well that’s a great question i guess i mean most of my work and my career has been towards writing these scientific papers, so there's probably three that i’m really, really proud of that are already masterpieces in the sense that i couldn’t have done any better and there are huge, they took a year each or something like that.  i’d be proud of those.   : my mission with writing these science papers is to really push the envelope for writing quality and style and especially to take a huge amount of information and then reduce it to a very short document that would almost be compelling to read, which is not typical for science papers.  so one of them, for example, is about the veins in leaves.  there has never been written a paper that comprehensively talks about all the different aspects of the combination of leaves.  there’s many fields that work on these from paleobiology to agriculture, physiology, technologies, biomedics…could we do a paper that just had everything in it and still be a twenty-page paper, but would really actually have all the information?  so it started with stacks of papers, maybe like 500 papers in stacks and then just boiling down all the information. the entire knowledge on leafanation is in this document. i mean there’s a long appendix as well. i’m proud of that because it took a lot of creativity even though it’s science reading.  : i have an english degree and a science degree so and i have an artistic inclination in a lot of way, so i try to combine those things and at the same time stay very humble and modest and just try to listen a lot. that’s kind of a rare combination. i would say for a scientist to combine those, language.   : it’s sort of an intuition i guess. there are some intuitive aspects of science, like you just have to look at it enough and then it suddenly emerges, just when you're matching your brain to the thing you're looking at at some level.  you’re not doing anything specific, but you look at it for long enough and then things just jump out and it’s clearly the important thing to say. i don't know where that comes form. : yes, i do do stream of consciousness writing and i’ll write two or three pages of writing and it’ll be pretty clear what’s the most interesting thing.  i’m always kind of looking for that…what is the essential thing to say and even if there’s a ton of essential things to say, that’s the other skill is not afraid of being comprehensive. if there’s 100 important things to say, to say all 100 important things.  i just stick with it until it’s all there and not just i've done enough, i’ll get paid.  :  again, you just know. you’ve exhausted, this is virtually everything. there’s something you can add later but you’ve got 95% of it.  then you got a lot of material to work with. : so i’m in plant biology and that is because in undergraduate, the last sort of semester just after i graduated, i got a job to work in the forest for the summer, like helping with field surveys of plants.  it just had a huge impact on me.  it was two months in this field station, pristine wilderness, in [country 1].  it was amazing and i was very creative.  after working, you would just draw or write or whatever.  there was so many beautiful places to hike out to and then after undergraduate, i took two years off just to travel around and that just kept coming back to mind.  then i looked into plant biology as a career and like yeah it’s so lucky and people don't even know it exists, but it’s huge. there’s so much opportunity.  like the level of science at the moment is so low that it is wide open for amazing discoveries.  : i did a lot of music when i was really young, and i had a fairly intense mom who really wanted us to learn.  i had two sisters and we all had to learn instruments. and then she told us to read very early as well.  have you ever heard of this method called ball stick bird? do you know who renee fuller is? she developed the method to treat down syndrome adults how to read and then my mom got obsessed with this and said she would try to teach her two-and-a-half-year-old kids to read with this because there had been some study that showed it could be done. so she taught us all to read by like three, reading fluently and stuff and so when it came to put us in school, we were all going to get accelerated.  my dad had been accelerated as a child so he was really against it socially.  he got build or something.  her solution was to put us in a french immersion school. so we went to this french immersion school in [city, country] and it was a non-expensive private school and you weren't allowed to speak english. everyone there was first generation immigrant and it was very intense, very rigorous.  they just brought in this advance curriculum from france where these teachers were form france and belgium, where the schools are highly streamed, so it’s just very intense.  i mean i could say that i had the benefit of extreme, intense, rigor, like that was a really hard school. my elementary school. so when i went to high school i was immediately in the top two percent just because i’ve been so early prepared.  i guess that helped me with confidence and the intense music. : piano and violin.   : i forgot everything but piano even though i got up to grade 8, which is the most advanced level in a row conservatory system before you would become a teacher.  and i was up at the level and then i completely forgot it all.  i got a keyboard last year and i can’t remember anything.  i can play a little stuff because of muscle memory, but i’m re-teaching myself to play just like hit songs because it’s a complete crowd pleaser.  it’s really easy. when you do classical music, you’re like what about pop music and they say it's so easy, it’s not even worth teaching and it’s true.  then a lot of these songs are just on the black keys.  people just had fun teaching themselves.  the best one is that song, dram on, by aerosmith and that’s like only on black keys.  i’m doing that.  i tried the guitar.  so, those things and then i don't know i guess i’ve just been inclination, as a kid i was really into fairies and fairytales like the oz books, stuff like that.  i don't know how i got into that but that stuff is really good for imagination. : probably, i mean yes.  i mean not a whole world.  if given the opportunity, i would be into creating worlds.  : i mean just on a personal level the family i grew up in was very intense, like people are all workaholics and quite dysfunctionally confrontational.  it took me awhile to learn more social skills, to be able to function in most situations.  i guess that's the biggest obstacle.  beyond that, i’ve been kind of lucky i haven't faced too many obstacles because of race.   : i mean i guess my family is a pretty dysfunctional family.  everybody is fighting all the time, everybody enjoys these confrontations.  i’m not inclined towards that.  however, all my early training was in that.  it used to be hard for me not to take things right out of the level, like you'll have a discussion and you zoom in to the thing that’s going to set off a fuse, you can’t even help it. : i wouldn't be surprised.  i mean honestly if i sit back and let my mind work the way it works, the first thing i'll do is picking apart what's going on and just being like how is this all completely wrong. i can say that’s been a challenge because you can't function in the world walking around doing that. you need to make friends. i more or less hide that nowadays.   but in school i had to be the smartass in every situation. : i had a few english teachers in high school you know and i've had my ph.d adviser definitely. i feel like i'm influenced by pretty much everybody that i'm talking to.  i'm pretty open to influence actually. : if i come by a person who is seriously obsessed by a topic, then i tend to get very influenced by it.  so i had one teacher who was obsessed with romantic poetry.  he just had pictures of all the romantic poets on the wall and he would constantly be giving me stuff to read.  and that was amazing because it made all of this advanced literature accessible even though i was just a teenager.  so that was huge. [writer 1], i read all those books in high school, i would say that was a huge influence on me.  that's all about being open to your sensitivity and creativity i would say.  and then my ph.d adviser was a victorian naturalist, like he might as well have been darwin. he looks like darwin and he was obsessed with him.  he could write an essay about every plant species in the world.  just having been exposed to that opened up like all of plant biology to me. so i guess people who open up things to being accessible to you...just by talking to them you can you know. : yes, i guess it is.  i've been pursuing it for so long, but i don’t necessarily without any proportional reward. so it feels like a responsibility and then you can convince yourself that it actually is a responsibility. we need more plant biologists.  : the future of the biosphere depends on it. on top of that, there's so many masterpieces of human thought that will be developed under a great understanding out of plant biology.  i think it really is important.  it feels kind of lucky to be involved in it. : whatever i'm trying to teach which is usually something very advanced.  i am trying to make it fun like playful to deal with something that is extremely difficult and complex and these kids are all very anxious about it because they need to get a pluses.  so i'm in there trying figure out ways to make it playful and fun while increasing the volume of information beyond the textbook.  i’ll see if i can make it kind of fun for them. i mean not fun for them but for the part of their brain that enjoys being activated.  so that's what i would say is my challenge and i'm really only doing it for my unknown motivation because you don’t really get rewarded for that in our system here. : to be really frank, there is something wrong with my reward system.  i only ever really feel ten seconds of pleasure. even if i won the biggest prize, i would only feel ten seconds of pleasure and then it would be gone.   : that’s pretty interesting, so for eudaimonia, is there ways of developing that? : what i could say is that the question i'm always asking people now is do they perceive people to have an intrinsic value or would you say people' value is more determined by their accomplishments.  it just turns out that people have a complete range of differences on this question and it seems to me that the most creative people that i know or that i've ever seen are the ones who more or less believe that it’s by your accomplishments and they themselves don’t really feel actually necessarily that they have intrinsic value.  and so they are just driven to keep accomplishing, accomplishing, accomplishing and then you see them dying and burning out.  it's a bit sad and i don’t want to end up like that.  you're asking about teaching, so i get these course evaluations and they're amazing and i feel good for the fifteen seconds and then it's more like gone. and so that's not the motivations because you were asking about motivation : yes, my father for example, he would be the extreme version of it's only accomplishments.  he himself never stops working.  : maybe it is, but maybe the most creative output in the world comes from the people who suffer. you would know more about that than i would.  would you say that more creative output comes from people subject to this issue? : that's good to hear.  sometimes i get stressed about that.  what if to be most successful, to think things form that way, you really should be really harder on yourself and not rest on your morals and keep going and keep going. : yes, i do, i have a different idea. i feel like everybody can succeed.  in my view, the only real predictor of success is past success, so somebody shows up and already has achieved all of this stuff, you can predict they're going to do it.  it's triangular.  all the rest of the people that haven't proven themselves all have different pathways.  it depends a lot on my and them and what else is happening around them.  i assume that everybody has it in them.   : well just in my experience, the women far outperform the men. whatever bias sample i have, my lab is essentially women and that's just because every time there is people competing to get into the program or to get a job, female candidates far outshine men.  that's just a sample. : it may be that having additional obstacles or conflicting pressures they've had to develop, better skill sets.  it could be that they're not bringing a competitive need to outperform their neighbor, they're bringing more of their own deeper level of personal interest to the topic.  i would say they really have an advantage.  i mean it's a mess right now.  there's so many fewer women in science and it's becoming really clear that it's not a lack of any kind of skills.  they are just dropping out for these various reasons.  this ph. d geography student, she's amazing, and she's working on dry force in hawaii and she's leaving to go physical therapy school because it's attracting her more.  you know if you're a smart woman right now, the world is your oyster, so why would you stay in science necessarily, it's kind of male-dominated and stressful and competitive with no clear future. other stresses like harassment. anyway, that’s the rant. : yes, i have two sisters. : i'm the middle. one is two years older, one is two years younger. : is this confidential? they're both dysfunctional people.  they're both serious hypochondriac. they're both brilliant people. my older sister dropped out of school to grow her own food and be a hippie. and then she was a hippie activist and then a gay activist and then she had a big health problem, so i would say she's sort of a landscaper in ottawa.  she's obsessed with her own ill health. and then my younger sister never overcame this confrontational thing i was talking about that i had to overcome, so she's probably the most offensive person.   she worked at the parks, she became a journalist and did pretty well for a news stations and being a news producer.  and then conflicts so she dropped out of that and then she had a health crisis and became a patients' rights activist.  good for her. she got a law changed in [country 1].  the confidentiality medical records being used to hide medical errors. like if you want to get information on medical error rates, you get nothing. it's all heavily protected so the hospitals wanted to suppress medical error data.  so for about a year there was full access to that and its rampant everyday people are getting wrong prescriptions and sent to the wrong surgery as you might expect.  there's no accountability. she did that but that's also very depressing, so now she's a freelance journalist.  her last one was [journal piece 1] and it came out in the biggest newspaper in [country 1], her expose article about how filthy public pools are. public pools, yes you can prove they're filthy, but come on now no one wants to go to public pools. : it really varies. if i'm honest about it, 5-6 hours. : i mean yes. i always wake up at 6 to 6:30 but i may go to bed at like 1 o'clock just because i'm doing stuff. : i tend to be more of an evening person because that’s when i, but i can be morning, so i guess both. : like either of those.  first thing in the morning is amazing, especially doing anything math-related.  it's completely clear and you’ve been rebooted that’s the best time.  you can take a nap in the middle of the day and then do that, but you really need to be rebooted. evening is the best time to get writing done that is not going to take too much intense thinking.  you can get more of that done in the evening.  : yes, i know exactly what you mean.  i think i try to do both.  like i would see that as a continuum and i try to do across the range. so there's some things i've been keeping in for years. i just have a lot of projects. i you say what is the key to my having been really prolific at least in a sense of 120 papers which is a lot more than i would have had to do for my stage.  i just have a lot going on in parallel. so i sat down and made a list of all the projects i'm on and there's like 45 projects and some of those are ideas that i've been keeping and it might be three years from now and then i'll just write that down and it'll be amazing.  but some of these things i'm just trying to get out fast with drafts, but i do take the drafts through many iterations regardless like i don’t do one draft and then say done.  : at least 3.  going from the second to the third would involve almost rewriting the whole thing.  going from word to word, line to line. a first really rough draft, a second that it still really crappy, and then a third where it turns into something that's polished.  you wouldn’t try to produce something that is compulsive, you would want people compelled to read on. : oh, i know it is, i know that’s what i feel like a big motivator for me i feel like it’s much more like not even in terms of reading in literature but like in terms of the science you cannot really change people's minds until you get them on that level. you can give them a new data point, but all they're going to do with that data point is trying to adjust it to fit with they're thinking already. like if you could take them to a compulsive view of what these actually mean, you can give a different view and significance. they won't take the data as supporting their view. : sometimes i think those things are great.  mind mapping and brainstorming and linking these up and taking a step back to see what the ideal order of these things verses those things.  i like tables.  i like to take big descriptions of text and turn them into tables. like it could start with writing an introduction and suddenly realize there are 5 hypotheses.  why don’t you take those 5 hypotheses and stick them to a table of hypotheses and then you can just write a brief paragraph saying there are 5 hypotheses?  see table 1.  that’s a way to put order on things.  i think walking, going for walks.  yeah : i have a really good memory. there's gaps obviously, but i do have a really good memory. so i do usually try to keep everything in mind at all times. so i would say often, very often, i remember more than everyone else in the room so i have an advantage and it comes off if i'm in a workshop or something i can remember that.  i'm not alone, i'm not unique in this. i'm just one of those people who will remember more than the average person.  movies, songs, events that happened, papers, statistical tests for a paper stuff like that.  i just take things a little more seriously than you need to.  : it just provides the sense that it matters and therefore part of your brain will remember it if you think it matters. i'm able to believe on some level that every single detail matters to the point my brain responds by just remembering it.  : i don’t know.  that really is an important thing.  i guess most people would have more of a hierarchy of what things matter and what things don’t and i just don’t have that as well developed as some people.  i just tend to think that really trivial things matter a lot. my mom has a real issue i don’t know how you diagnose this where she starts to speak, and at least 50% of what she says is completely irrelevant to what she wants to express.  she just goes off on these tangents. it's very frustrating.  as a kid it was fine, but as i've gotten older it's gotten increasingly harder to listen to this its like get to the point.  she has no sense of what matters or what doesn't matter so maybe because of that? because of exposure to her?  i mean i'm better at it.  i don’t sound like i'm rambling all over the place.  : yes, am i rewarded because the world makes a lot more sense.  for example, at work people say what's the solution or significance of this?  here's my data, what story would you tell with this? i remember a lot.  i've seen this five times like i know. you know what i mean? i've seen this before.  i always have this feeling i've seen this before.  it always matches up with 3 other things i remember.  : if you have a low latent inhibition, you rapidly learn what becomes relevant? : i definitely have trouble with this stuff.  if you were told to learn this thing, i am quite a slow learner.  i'm a plant biologist, so part of this is botany, like you need to learn all the species and families.  now i'm pretty good at it, but it took years and i was faking it for a lot of years because it is really slow for me to learn a lot of this stuff. more or less i'm attending to everything else in the background. but by the time i learn it, i have a much deeper and broader understanding of all the details. i am kind of a slow learner but once i get there, this sounds so arrogant.  i told my ph.d advisor this and he told me that it was a very arrogant thing to say, but i did.   : both.  i completely see what you mean.  sometimes the first thing that come to mind is actually really important. i would say totally what i go for.  you let everything out. i've never really tried to inhibit. i'm trying to uninhibit more as i go through life.  : i guess for me it would be who you are at your core, like your sense of identity. and when you work on something and reconnect with that which is very early child, i don’t know if this feeling really changes or who you are inside. when you're working, and you feel like you're getting towards that, you're being more creative in the sense that the stuff you're producing is better.  :  what is my core identity? my core identity is so happy, but you're rarely given a chance to be as happy as one's identity if you're happy at the core.  that's way creativity is a happy process because that's your chance to access that and it is really happy.  i have an eight-year-old son i can also see him having the same thing.  you go through life and you pick up reasons to become less happy or more rigid or tragedies happen, and you won’t be your happy core.  so that's what i would say is the main thing. i start to get really happy when things are creative.  : it would be superficial to say your inner child because it isn't really your child its you’re a … so i don’t want to be diagnosed as schizophrenic, but i feel like if you go deep into your core on this answer, there's magic and a feeling that those things are kind of possible even if they're not. that would be your inner core. other people have thought that. you go deep into your own. you hit something like that. for me, that is very happy, that kind of omniscience. you have a process, which for me involves sitting in front of the computer 90% of the time working on stuff, but when you access that, then that's the important thing. you can do it for minutes, you can do it for hours, you can get a lot done.  i don't know if you could teach that because some people would be rolling their eyes when you talk about this stuff. right i mean\ : umm... not really. : oh god. [laughter]. how many do i get to name? : ok. um...lets see. um...so i think probably actually the thing i'm most proud of um are my kids. they’re my best production.  : still still still in process. [laughter] um.. i feel like my husband and i have done a pretty good job orienting them to care about ideas and people and learning. so i think that’s probably number one. um... number two is... probably in some collective sense my intellectual career, and by that i don’t mean just my professional career. my, my strength is not specifically say my mathematical ability though, i'm a...you know i'm a faculty member in a mathematical field. but rather um my strength across a wide range of the areas from math to science to music to writing to languages um... and its... and... all the way throughout my life i've maintained a really strong interest in all of those things and it's combing them that i think makes my... my biggest contribution to science. so i guess i would say i'm pretty proud of that and the track record that goes along with it. um... and the one particular part of my life that probably doesn't show up that much in my academic record is my involvement in music especially um up through graduate school, i was really seriously involved um in classical music, i was concert master of my college orchestra, i played concertos with orchestras, and that’s been a really special and important part of my life. : uh...there are probably a couple of different factors. so, one i think is luck that i got very good genes for um.. you know... for intelligence in for some of the creative process um which i can't take credit for, but probably just as important as that umm... is that i was really lucky with my environment. i had those parents and teachers all the way along who really valued learning, who valued being interested in a wide range of topics, who encourage me to explore the work, open to my having my own ideas about things and giving me the freedom to try them, and so that made it much much easier for me to reach for all the things that in the end i became proud of. um i feel very lucky i haven't had to overcome a lot of adversity in order to reach those achievements, i've had an incredibly good support network, um and i think that’s certainly made it much much easier, would i have done a lot of these things anyway? i hope so, um but certainly having that kind of freedom and encouragement and all of the resources made it much much easier to do. : the biggest one and there's no question um and we talked about it some last time is that i have a pretty significant um a chemistry based anxiety and depression disorder. it runs in both my parents' families but probably more strongly in my mother's family, lots of relatives have it. towards the end of high school and the beginning of college it was really severe and it took a while to find the right balance of treatments for it, um and even though it's now relatively under control, uh there's no question that that's been hardest thing in my life to deal with and probably one of the worst things about it other than just the stress and the depression um is the fact the uh it is certainly... [inaudible]... some periods more than others but but probably across the spectrum taken some of the joy out of my love of exploring things because the things that are most interesting are also the things that are scariest. that’s probably sort of true by definition and so when the anxiety level is chronically high, it's hard to enjoy those things as much as i might, so i can remember back to junior high school where the anxiety was an issue but not nearly as severe and having much more pure joy in these things than i think i probably do now, and i still find that very sad and very frustrating and i think that without it i suspect i would have been able to do more, though of course the experience also  you know colored some of the contributions i've been able to make so its very hard to evaluate that. : umm... i don’t think that there has been one single big one, i can describe some important moments if that’s relevant to the discussion. : ok, so so this is just a sequence of memories but they do stand out. um so one or a pair of memories, one from junior high one from high school which i think contributed to making me realize how much i love mathematics and how important it was to me so i... its always been there my father is a theoretical physicist and my mother a computer programmer so um there's a lot of math there and i always knew that it was something i was good at and i enjoyed, but i remember one day staying after class with my algebra teacher in seventh grade and he derived the quadratic formula for me and it was the first time i think that i've ever seen that concretely a proof or derivation and it was like magic, and i remember thinking in that moment "ah ha!" this is why my dad loves what he does, this is why probably i'm meant to do math. and then later on in high school that was reaffirmed by other classes especially geometry, which is all about proofs and having those see the mind of gods sort of moments where you suddenly realize how the universe works. i also remember um a day in the car when my mom asked me, i was the only girl on my high school math team for various competitions, and she asked me how i felt about that, did it bother me, and without thinking about it i said "no i like beating them at their own game" and then i realized what i said. two parts. one, it was all the support, encouragement, the inherent belief of everyone around me that i was great at this stuff, that i could still say this was a boys game, appalled me, and added to a layer of determination and a realization that various kinds of discrimination, a very subtle [inaudible] to fight against. but it also made me realize that yes i was in fact loving that and that i wasn't bothered by somebody seeing me as an outsider and that if they did, um that i was quite willing to be my own person about it and feel good about that. um, so i think those were very important early moments. umm...later moments umm...so i went to a liberal arts college [college 1: where the participant went to college] and i think that was collectively very, very important for me. it was a place that was extremely supportive, it encouraged umm.. taking your own approach to things to discussing ideas with other students and faculty at great lengths, and the faculty would be out on the field playing soccer, played afternoon, and, you know people would play and talk with them, it was a great environment for encouraging mixing of ideas. it allowed me to do something that i wanted very much wanted to do, which was to not focus only on math... umm... in college because i really did care these other things, especially music but also literature and languages and a lot of other things, and it kept that door open and showed me how valuable it could be to my mathematical career. and i still believe that one of the reasons i'm actually a very effective statistician is because i'm such a good writer because i learned to think about other fields and to understand what the subject matter scientists i'm working with are trying to do, that i care about that part of it and not just numbers. that was very broadly important for me and i think it gave me a good foundation, it also gave me a secure environment in which to deal with the anxiety disorder, umm which i think might not have happened at other sorts of places, umm and one incident that i remember very very clearly at graduation. i did very very well at [college 1], i was the second person in the hundred year history of the college to finish with a perfect gpa and i got a nsf fellowship and all these various prizes and one of the music faculty came up to me after the various awards ceremonies and said, "you know i thought you’d like to hear this…umm i was sitting next to somebody at the platform and you kept getting all these awards" and the next thing she said was "that’s very impressive she must be a great scientist but i bet she can’t play a musical instrument", and a guy turned to her and said "well actually she's concert master of the orchestra and they gave her a music prize"... and that was kind of magic for me that it... an affirmation moment that putting all these thing together was really valuable, and if you had to pick the moment in my life where i felt most confident, that was probably that moment, umm that i really felt like i'd achieved a good milestone, that i had been doing things to my full and it had paid off. um, the next big moment probably, set of moments probably, happened in graduate school. so despite all the liberal arts background i went off to graduate school in theoretical mathematics at [university 1: where the participant went to grad school] and the school was very carefully picked with the guidance of my parents, especially my father who said "you're good enough to do theoretical mathematics but i know you really well and i'm a theoretician and i don’t think you want to be a 21st century theoretical mathematician, i actually think you want to be a 17th or 18th century mathematician developing the mathematics that um that makes science possible, that modern theoretical mathematics is unbelievably abstract and he thought i was gonna miss all of these other things. and the reason for [university 1] was that not only did it have a great math department, had the best statistics department in the country, strong physics, strong linguistics, artificial intelligence, computer science, the places that we thought i might be most likely to move sideways to is in fact his concern was founded and then the usual way my father's thought processes was that he was right. um and so about a year and a half in, um... sitting in one of my theoretical math classes, i found myself thinking well this is very beautiful, but why am i gonna to care in five years and is the fact that five other people will care either a problem, and that and the set of conversations i had with some of the stanford statistics faculty were what changed my direction away from pure mathematics towards statistics, which is for me sort of the best of both worlds, i get to do the mathematics but i can apply it to all the other areas that i've always loved. i can even do literature if i want, there are people doing (antextual?) analysis and things like "is this written by shakespeare" and that's a data statistics problem actually but its a literature problem too. so i think that that was also a very important turning point for me. and then of course there have been more specific things like i just had just happened to get involved during graduate school in um a project that was oriented around psychiatry, it was a depression study and it led to my thesis problem and it led eventually to people... a part of my funding when i moved to [university 2: where the participant moved to] came from psychiatry and it was because i had done these sorts of applications and that opened up one of the biggest academic opportunities of my life. so there a number of chance moments um but also a number of very deliberate choices to keep as many options open as long as i possibly could to try to use all the different skills and interests i had. : umm...i'm not sure how specific this is to my field, but the advice that i give most often is that thing that i, first of all is that thing that i ended with, keep as many options open for as long as you possibly can. umm the second piece is that it's really important to love what you do. if you're gonna try to do something hard, you’re going to try to do something big, important, umm you’re gonna try to do something that will take a long time, you have to care about it. it's too hard to do something non-routine if you don’t really care about it. and the third piece that goes along with that is that you have to set your own benchmarks for what the right balance is between all the different parts of your life. i did [inaudible] young woman who have the false impression that i'm super woman, and that i manage to somehow easily juggle academics, motherhood, a marriage, all the rest of it, its not easy at all, i certainly don't have a good handle on it. they haven't seen me at three in the morning in tears because one of the kids is sick and there's a grant due, and i can’t deal with everything. umm... but part of one of things that makes it hard is that there will always be somebody pushing you to value most at any given moment the piece that they care about. you know, your kids, your kids want you do something, your partner wants you do something, your academic department would be happier if you didn’t have either, the spouse or the kids, because then you'd have more time for your research. even within the research field different people are going to be pulling on you to work on different projects, different ideas, and you are never going to be happy by trying to be perfect for everybody else or their standard and their goal for you, umm because you could always do any one of the things better if you didn’t do all the other things. i've published fewer papers because i have my kids. um, you know i've spent less time with my husband because i have my research career. if you, you need to try to come to terms with the fact that if you decide each of those different things is important to you and you spend time on it that by definition that will take away from other things, and the right balance is the one that works for you not for any of the other constituents, and that’s, that’s one of the hardest things. that’s still the one that i think i do very badly, not that i don’t do the things that i think are important, but that i feel guilty about the cost to all the others.  : umm... i would...well, so there are a couple of things... one is that you need to close your ears to outsiders and decide what's most important to you. if you really want a family you should have it, if you really want to have a global academic career that involves traveling around to different places you can have that, but it will make other things difficult, you have to think about what you really want, what looking back at the end you'll be happy to say that you've done. and that you shouldn't try to postpone one of the things you've decide is important until you've dealt with one of the others. because one of the realities of this kind of life, whether you're talking about academia or general creativity is that nothing is ever done, nothing is ever truly finished, any research project, any creative project, is a process and there's never a final answer, there will never be a moment when you've cleared enough space so that now is a good time to have a child or now is a good time to go up for tenure or now is a good time to take a leave and go explore something else. its always going to be difficult so if you decided at something important to you to do, you should go ahead, if you wait too much, the chances are you won't end you doing it, or not the way you planned. and i think people miss out on a lot of things that way. umm... that’s not to say i would advise young people always just to be uncautious and go for everything, there are realities to recognize too, about how the system works. so within academia we spend a lot of time saying we value creativity, we value multidisciplinarity, people working across fields, people being super collaborative and so forth, but the reality is that if you're going out for tenure, that if you try to do to much of that, you won’t have what looks like a full independent established record in any one of those areas and it will hurt you, so there is a value to making your mark, giving yourself a safe base before you really let yourself go. and that's also a tricky balance deciding when to make that move because probably your best work will come out of that, and of course that can help you succeed either academically or in the creative word, but there - it can also cause problems if you do too much too soon. so you need to be aware of how the world you’re living in works, not necessarily to obey all its rules but to weigh the costs and benefits to you of making decisions at any given time, and to find some people who can help you navigate that.  : umm... absolutely. so number one on the list are my parents in terms of general intellectual processes and philosophy and my father in particular as a scientist in a field adjacent to my own, so i may have been enormously important to my thinking. umm... i had a pair of math professors in college who were also incredibly important to me, not just in stimulating the love of mathematics but in sharing with me the feeling that how i link the math to other things was just as important. umm... i was fortunate to have a wonderful thesis advisor who was prepared to listen to my ideas and encourage me to develop them but also not to just stand off and be aloof and not provide any support. he was the perfect balance for that and he was incredibly supportive both as a person and as a scientific mentor and given my anxiety illness and so forth, having somebody like that was crucially important, and i think it was important for everybody but it was especially so for me. umm, and then my husband who is also a statistician and um one of... he's probably better statistician than i am actually, maybe not as good a multi-field person or [inaudible, 27:04] but a better statistician. but more important, he's one of most intellectually honest people i've ever met and extremely caring and that means i've always had a touchstone to go back to somebody that i can really talk to about both my life and my work and how they relate to each other which is very important.  : absolutely. umm, for me actually that's probably the single most important and satisfying part of my academic career, its not that i don’t like the science problems that i work on, but when i talk to a student whether its an undergrad or master student or thesis student or post-doc, junior faculty member and i see something click and a light goes on in their eyes and they get something, they understand how statistics will help them, they understand how it works, they see the answer to a problem they’ve been struggling with, or even just that they feel like they have a better understanding of how academia works or someone they can talk to about how to balance career and life interests. you get when you do the mentoring, lots and lots and lots of those moments and you know if you've achieved something, that you accomplished something for somebody. the research problems you do a particular project, maybe in the long run it'll have an impact, maybe it won't. if you're unbelievably lucky you get to discover the double-helix or develop a polio vaccine or develop the theory of [inaudible, 29:12] relativity, but virtually nobody gets to do that and even if you do make a genius move, how much it will affect anybody you don’t know. when i'm working with mentees i can see something good happening, something that matters every time, and so i find that both very important and very satisfying.  : umm...sometimes. there are things that i can see that tell me they probably don't have the instinctive understanding of the field that will be necessary to be successful. statistics actually requires a what a for many people a counterintuitive way of working at things and some people it doesn't come naturally and other people it does and that’s not usually too hard to figure by talking to people. its also generally possible to get a sense of whether somebody has the necessary drive. you can have very good skills and still be unlikely to make a big creative contribution because not enough of your heart is there or because you're not self propelling enough. the people who do something big and creative are usually at some level driven or obsessed by it. its not just "oh its nice", there's a need to do it, to find out. and you can usually get a sense at least after you've talked to somebody enough whether some aspect of that is present in them. but if i take the students who i see in my department who are very gifted and work extremely hard and seem like they would be good collaborators, can i necessary tell you which one of them is going to be a star, absolutely not. it's accepted in theory where... you can see that the person is just off the charts. even the next level down is very very hard to judge. which person is going to be ok and which person is going to turn out to be really good, umm, i mean this was something that my dad used to talk about too, you know that, he was faculty at princeton in his physics class had this idea of who was going to be a star and who wasn't going to be, and this was a time at the best physics department in the country and they have a lot of people who are going to be stars and they weren't wrong about a high percentage of them. they weren't wrong when they said "we think this set of people will succeed", those people succeeded but what the relative ordering was and which ones turned out to make what was eventually seen as a huge contribution, that they didn't get right. and i think occasionally somebody is so great that you can tell early, maybe mozart or beethoven is, but even with someone like einstein, nobody saw that coming early on, and i don't believe i have some magic insight to that, i can detect certain things which are necessary and certain things which are prohibitive but to parse it too finely beyond that is extremely difficult.  : in terms of how successful they are, in terms of how they think about things? what's the slant of the question? : ok so so first of all, i would say that statistics is probably overall one of the better quantitative or hard science fields in which to be a woman. umm partly that's because its a newer field so there's not as much entrenchment, mathematics had a thousand years of being a men’s only subject and its still very much got that mindset, that's certainly something that i saw… when i was still considering being a theoretical mathematician, so i think that i think i probably would in statistics haven’t seen as big differences as i saw potentially in the some of the related fields. that being said…women have… still do not hold as many of the really senior positions umm in the big departments, the big institutions, so worth, as men do. part of that’s historical, but part of that is that i think women still end up making different sets of choices than their male counterparts. i think a woman is more likely to decide that family umm… external relationships, other aspects of their life that they care about are worth a bigger share of the pie than they could give them if they went all out for a high level academic career, because that all out academic career requires real obsession and doesn’t feel like it leaves enough time and i still see more women opt out than men and its still, it is still easier for a man to have all of those other aspects of his life and have it taken care of. you know i see lots of men in academia who-who have a partner who's career is not as overall demanding as theirs. i see fewer women who have the dominant career in the partnership it’s more likely that when i see a woman in the field, she has partner who has an equal level career and if she's lucky as i am…i’m…my husband falls on what i would call the extreme and lightened end of the spectrum and he really tries to share everything equally and i think we succeed fairly well, but even with that, when i had the kids it affected me more than him and there's no way around that and so i still think, and i consider myself on the very lucky end of that, so i still see more women who either choose to cut out various aspects of possible aspects of life like choosing not to get married or have children umm or who still bear the bigger part of the burden in the partnership and it affects their careers and they're more likely i think than men to decide that the price isn’t worth it. umm, you know i've certainly seen former women students both in my field and students who i've taught in public health or psychiatry more generally who made the option not to give up having a career but to back off a level on the intensity to make other things possible. um so i think that's still an issue. i think i also still see a pattern that uhh the women in my field are more collaborative… umm…. less aggressive or confrontational sometimes, less likely to push themselves forward in certain scientific settings and i’m not meaning to imply i think most of them are weak or that they don’t aggressively go after what they want in their career, but even…in places that are very favorable to women which i think my graduate school department was very very good about, and which i think my current department has on the whole been have been, my department have been pretty good about. there's still, there's still a difference. umm, and i still see in the [university 1] stat department is a great department, they’re incredibly supportive of their women students, they have very few women faculty. umm, i’m, you know i have a joint appointment in the [university 2] math department. umm partly thats my own interest in maintaining connections to straight statistics as well as bio statistics. part of the motivation for them was, they don't have enough women faculty, they were getting criticized for it and i’m an opportunity for them and that's another thing that difficult about being a woman. umm in science, in academia is because the numbers are lower, your always asked to be part of every committee, every search, every extra group and there are benefits to that and there are big costs to that. umm, i get overloaded because i have a hard time saying no to some of those things…umm… so i think that that's something that's is different too, and not just for women, for anybody who checks an unusual box, that sort of thing is an issue.  : umm so my work has a couple of different pieces…umm… yeah i mean well, there are a lot of pieces, there's the service, there's the teaching and etc. and the ideas for those things don't really come from something particularly special unless i'm developing a new elective related to my research, but in the research, then you because i run this  bio-statistics consulting group, there's a lot of work that i do that fundamentally um is based on other people’s ideas and my role in it is to in a creative sense is to figure out how to make their data, their study design, and so forth work for them so they can answer the scientific question they want to answer, and that can require a lot of creativity, um most studies do not automatically produce a data set that, you know an analysis method you learned in your, you know your one year stat method sequence will cover perfectly, real data never is as nice as what shows up in the textbook. so there's still a lot of creativity to that and for me i think one of the reasons i'm really good at that is the ability to do synthesis, to actually learn about the other fields and combine that with the mathematics, to translate back and forth between them, so that's one really important aspect of my work. its not, its not that i necessarily initiate the original question, but i may initiate how to think about it so that it become answerable…umm, and translate back and forth between the data side and the science side. that's one piece. the other piece, my own personal research, so developing new ideas in statistics…and some people just have an idea out of the blue. umm maybe they carry on a general line of problems which started when they started working with their thesis advisor and it continued to suggest new ideas to work on, but for me that's not mainly how it’s worked. what tends to happen for me is that in the process of working on all of these other projects, and i get exposed to a wonderful range of projects and data sets umm by virtue of the collaboration, some question will arise that it wasn't clear how to solve and maybe i even come up with a, a sort of ad hoc ok for purposes of this study, this is the best thing we can do, but it raises a more general theoretical question, and so then i try to think about how could i solve that in general, what are the real statistical ideas that underlie that, can i come up with a broader theory that would cover not just that instance but a bunch of related problems, so my methodological work has tended very much to grow out of my applied work. and then it loops back, and that’s more satisfying because it also means that if i come up with some interesting new methodology, probably someone's gonna care, and maybe even try to use it…umm instead of it just being ok there's a theoretical paper on a journal that another theorist may be interested in, but in practice probably no ones going to go to the effort to do that fancy extra thing when the marginal improvement is small. so that's, that's, that's how the two parts of my research life play on each other. : oh absolutely [laughter]. umm, i....i think that that’s probably the scariest thing about doing research or i would assume any other creative area is that there are moments when you have to create something out of nothing and you by definition don't know where to start and you have to  figure out well where do i want to end, and can i work backwards to see a path, umm or can i get an idea from something i've done before but make it different enough so that its not just a boring repeat. umm the collaborative side of my work that’s must less of a problem. i have way too much and there's always something that needs to be done so and in fact that for me i think it’s danger to the creative side to my work is that it would be so easy just to be reactive and work on all the things that people quote unquote "need" but the right word is really probably "want" me to do for them. umm and what the doing the new things slide because it’s the hardest, it has the most inertia, it has the most something from nothing aspect to it. umm, i don't think that there have, has ever been a moment when there was a total blank, there's nothing that i can imagine that i should be working on but lots of moments when there are blanks as to "what should i try next?" or "what problem would be really interesting to me to look at next", and lots of noise the further i get along in my career of you know... i could so easily [inaudible, 47:16] my time with stuff that is, is routine or reactive. 
 : umm... [laughter] : umm, well so part of the answer is sometimes i do fall back. depends on how stressed out i am and how important these things to the other people are. umm... for me the way out... well there...there's sort of two ways out. one... one... three ways out. so one and the one that’s probably the most effective for me is to go talk with somebody, usually that means my husband because he... he both understand the field well enough that i can babble technical details at him without it being a problem, but also it's much easier to be open with him than a not random but you know, an available academic colleague...umm who doesn't necessarily know about the anxiety disorder, who's not necessarily as comfortably to say to, "i'm feeling really stuck and lost and its freaking me out". umm, so he's the right balance of someone who i can have both a personal conversation and a professional conversation and for me when i'm stuck it kind of has to be both, how i'm feeling and thinking about this. so that’s one avenue and often just the process of trying to explain to him what i'm thinking or failing to think about, um helps open it up. um, that’s one way out. another way out is to try to not solve the whole problem at once, but to try to convince myself there's at least some small mechanical piece that i can try, to make it into much much smaller bits. so you don't have to have the big idea today but you at least need to play with it, to touch something, to try something, to do a calculation, that may help trigger something. so that’s approach number two. the other approach is to try to let it go for a while and let, in the hopes that an idea will come up organically, and for me the escape for that is usually music. um, that doesn’t maybe, that approach i think doesn't happen for me as much now as it used to, umm because i simply don’t have the time. i can't do the music the way i used to and i don't have time to sit and listen for hours on end, and i'm not, and just listening as opposed to doing doesn't block things out quite as well. but none the less, the basic idea is balance, try to pick something else that's important to me but is not in the same domain, so working on my lecture notes or somebody else's problem wouldn't be a good choice for this. umm but but but...working you know on something with my kids or for my family or... playing music or something like that, to try to detach, um, sometimes will unstick me or at least make you feel more energetic and ready to go back and retackle it. um, but this is something i find very hard and the anxiety disorder though its pretty clearly based in large part in brain chemistry, i don't think its untied to the creativity or intellectual stuff. the things that i like, like the most and the places that i've done my best work have also been the most anxiety provoking.  : no no that’s that’s.  : um, for me rationality is very important but i, i should quality that a little bit by saying that in my field, creativity is largely inspired rationality, and i don't consider the rational solutions in statistics unintuitive. um, in fact, what makes a good statistician is in a large part having a real intuition about how numbers and in particular the logic of statistics works. so what will be a rational solution, a statistician is almost always going for a solution that has real logic and rigor and sort of the part of the definition of the field. but... often you, you often get there first by intuition and then work out why that, why it works logically, why it works rigorously, and adjust it as you go along so that it does. so i certainly think intuition plays a very important role in what i do, i'm i'm i'm good at math, i'm good at statistics because i have very good intuition about numbers and about a particular kid of logic, but in the end, it has to be rational. um, it's not purely artistic or purely creative. there are things, there are answers in my field that are not right in a way that i think maybe is not true in music, i don't think there's a musical composition that's wrong, i think there are ones that groups people will like or not like, but its not necessarily fairly inherently invalid, whereas there are things in my field that are invalid according to the axiomatic structure of the field. so it’s a little bit different, and even within my music, i should say that i was, i was very much a rationalist, it's not that i didn’t like romantic music, i played plenty of it and i enjoyed it very much, but the, but the music that i played best by far um was baroque music, particularly um polyphonic music, which means multiple voices playing at a time, and what i was really good at doing was hearing them all simultaneously in my head, being able to make all of them work at once, having the right balance among all of those different voices, and the reason i was good at that it is that it was about structure, it was almost mathematical. i could....you know i described the learning how to do a proof as a "seeing the mind of god" moment. i'm not religious but its the best phrase that i have had to describe, its just a magic moment when you see simultaneously how all of it works, and the theory of structured music was like that for me. two that i could see it in its entirety and that was a creative thing and an intellectual thing but it was also a rationalist thing. it followed a logic and a structure and a pattern that was very important, and the more you moved away from that, to purely emotive music, it wasn't that i didn’t like it or couldn’t play it well, but i actually interestingly couldn't play in it's inspired manner. um, so for me there's a tremendous duality, i can’t even really totally separate the two. um.  : um... i, lets see... so... it depends what stage we’re talking and the last question do "i publish stuff right away" is a little bit different from the others so i'll leave that separate for a moment. um... so i do... i sort of work from two ends. one is that even when i'm doing the methodological stuff, it's usually inspired by a question to which people would like an answer, um, that the kinds of data that i'm dealing with in my applied project require a method that would do "x" and so i do a certain amount of trying to work backward, starting with what i would like the finished thing to look like, and seeing can i work a number of steps back. i also play forward, so often i also will have the luxury of if i have a real dataset for which this is an issue and i spend a lot of time doing what probably most people wouldn't but a statistician or mathematician would, call playing with it, poking it, trying out different things especially for me doing a lot of visualization, trying to do what i did with the music, see all those data points at once and how they're behaving. and so i try to work from both those ends, what kind of product am i aiming for and how is this actual data behaving to try to work towards the middle, they, the playing a lot that may happen on a computer with the data files, seeing what happens, the working backwards from the end is probably more theoretical and involves more discussion, more trying to write ideas down on paper. um i actually do a lot of... in my head work so when i was in high school, if i had to write an essay, um, people would ask me how many drafts did you write, and i always had a hopeless time answering that because at least three or four of the drafts would happen in my head on the way to school, lying in bed at night, i would play with the words, and with the ideas and with the order, and i had a really hard time putting a sentence down or an equation down or an idea down until it had been mulled over a lot of times and was not perfect but not undeveloped. i'm very bad at just starting from scratch and writing down a whole bunch of stuff that’s not thought through. i'm hyper - hyper perfectionistic and i think part of this is not being able to write a sentence that’s not close enough to perfect, but it's also because it's important to me to see the whole structure of something. i don’t work by just sort of starting at totally at the beginning and seeing how it evolves. i really need to see a big picture. and because of that i think i feel the need to play around with a lot of pieces in my head, on the computer, wherever it is, like moving pieces around on a puzzle board, before i get to the point where i actually put something down. so i don’t usually start writing a paper terribly early in the process, i actually tend to write it somewhat late once i've mulled it over. now the hope with that is that once i do decide that i'm ready to put it down, that the first draft it appears on the paper, um, or the first version of the code that will implement the method or whatever it is will be far closer to done than what many people's first drafts look like. um but do i then end up [inaudible, 1:02:13] it a lot once its on paper, yes. i rewrite a lot, i actually care a lot about how i say things. um, that’s that’s a leftover from my mom who is an english major as well as a computer scientist and my liberal arts education where every class had writing even if it was a math class and my thesis advisor who was a stickler about it. um, so not only is it a question of getting the idea right but i find it really important to convey the idea correctly and i think the result of that is that i've probably written fewer total papers but the ones that are uniquely my own methods i feel are much better papers because of it, and i’d rather have them that way. um, in terms, and that gets me a little bit to the "do i publish quickly"... no, i don't publish especially quickly um for a lot of my papers the timeline is dictated by the people i'm working with. for the ones that are more my own, its um, its probably slow but i always feel by the time they go out, that they’re, that they're very carefully thought through. usually when i go back and read them later, gee that was really, that was really tightly put together um and that, and that’s very important to me. it's also partly the nature of the field so in a lot of the medical or psychiatry journals, um turn around times are very short, you submit, you get a review back quickly, it appears quickly, its really important to get it out quickly in case somebody else is doing a similar study, um and you know, you want, you need your data to be used quickly, seen quickly. statistics papers take a whole lot longer to publish, they tend to be longer, um they tend to be more theoretical, so you’re not going to have a three or four page paper in a statistics methods journal, they're just not like that. if you’re a theoretical mathematician you publish even fewer and they're  even longer and they take even longer and part of the reason is that for even another intelligent reader to check them to figure out how you did your proof and to really make sure they understand that every step of it is logically correct, takes quite a while, so review times are much longer too. um, that, and i find it interesting watching that my two papers [inaudible, 1:05:09] just the whole, the whole timeline um, from start to finish is very very different. um, that's... i don't know that it's necessary but i think it probably is intrinsic to the kinds of problems.  : um... i think that... i don't even think that’s uniform within my, within my work. so... in terms of applications papers i think i publish at quite a high rate, i'm very collaborative. in terms of purely methodological papers, i... i publish fewer of those and at a slower rate than people who would be considered methodology stars. um, part of the problem here is that there are many many ways to be a biostatistician and there are many ways to be a classical statistician and the kind of position i have where a lot of the work is oriented around applications, its actually a little bit unusual because although there's a desperate need for people in all the sciences to get statistical help with their data, nih will not fund a study if you don’t have a decent statistician on it, the fact remains that statistics and biostatistics departments don’t always reward that kind of work as much. um, there's this tradition that the ultimate paper is a pure methods paper that you publish in [inaudible, names of journals, ~ 1:07:46-1:07:53] or the new england journal and that that’s what a quote unquote real statistician is. i personally think that that’s silly, i think that a lot of the big statistics contribution is being able to interact with all the other sciences, not just sit in an ivory tower and create something beautiful onto itself, but the fact remains that for a long time that was what was valued in the field, i think it's changing and its getting easier to do the combination of things i do. and i think in my totality, i'm very productive if you look at the total number of applied papers, methods papers, mentees i have both statistics and in all these other fields that i work with, the number of thesis committees that i've been on career work, the number of grant proposals i've been involved in is enormous, if you collect all of those things up, i think my total productivity is very high, but if you just googled me... i don’t think you would necessarily see that full picture at all. um, i try to convey it in my cv but... what my strength is-is not having a sky high metric in one area, its that i have as much as i do in so many different domains, and that’s consistent with what was my strength in high school and college, it wasn't that i was the single best mathematician pomona had ever seen, it was that i was simultaneously at the top in all those different areas and i think that’s carried true to my career too so it depends on how you want to count prolific-ness, and i think, i think that’s a very hard thing to quantify. i also don't necessarily agree that generation is the perfect metric in the sense that... um... haydn wrote well over a hundred symphonies, beethoven wrote nine, brahms wrote four. um, but any one of, and haydn was a great composer i'm not knocking him, but he wrote more smaller works, each of the [inaudible, 1:11:00], what beethoven and brahms wrote with their symphonies were a smaller number of much much bigger and incredibly profound pieces and any metric that says, well haydn is going to write a greater symphony than brahms because you know he's already got a hundred of them to his track record, well haydn churned them out weekly for his patron. brahms sat and thought about each of his literally for years, he couldn't even bring himself to write the first one because it wasn't going to be beethoven. um, so i think that somewhere you also have to ask about the quality and that's even harder to assess and i certainly won't make any [inaudible, 1:11:50-53], but just to say that some of the best statisticians i've known have not been people with a zillion publications but that the ones they've had had been profoundly important. [name 1: a researcher] was a senior person at [university 1] when i was there, he actually had a relatively small number of publications if you went by the numbers or even the numbers in the great journals, he wouldn't be at the top of anybody's list, but if you went, if you looked at how impactful he was, everybody considered [name 1] a genius. he was important, it's just that he didn’t put out a new thing every week. so i, i hesitate over how you quantify the productivity.  : um, i have a meeting at two so we've just about got it.  : [deep sigh]…. on.... on a typical weekday... i would say i probably spend... nine to ten hours... that are really... thinking about work related things, but its very hard to actually accurately count because even time when i am driving over to pick up my kids from school, i’m probably thinking about how to rewrite a grant proposal or how to make that simulation work or some new idea and i wake up frequently in the middle of the night or early in the morning and i can’t necessarily go back to sleep because an idea is bugging me. um, i make a very very conscious effort in the evening and on weekend unless i have an emergency grant is due tomorrow kind of thing, that i take a bunch of time where my focus is on my kids. um, so i, i don't have probably that super enormous volume time, i don't spend a hundred hours a week sitting down working, but is it always there in the back of my head, yeah probably.  : um, yes i think that synthesis is actually probably the thing that i'm best at. um, that i can understand enough fields well enough that i'm able to connect them, usually to make a connection its not good enough to know one field really well and then just have a glancing awareness of another one, you have to reach a certain minimum level in any area to make the connections and i'm pretty good in a diverse array of areas so i think that helps, but i also don't know how to tell you where that comes from. um, it, some of it feels almost magical to me, um the best ways to describe it is through my, my love of language, and language games, word games, i'm a very good scrabble player. one of the things i do really well, i don't know how well you know scrabble but you get seven letters at a time and you try to make up words and the best thing you can do in scrabble is use all seven of your letters at once um, its called going out, i am really really really good at seven letter anagrams. if you give me a set of letters, even if i don't see the word right away, there's a good chance i can tell you i think there is a seven letter word there. and sure there are routines i go through, i know common groupings of letters, i know certain patterns that might help you find them faster, but part of it is intuition, that i know the word is there, and somehow if i let my brain just... play with it in the background, i'm going to see it, and a lot of the connections work the same way, and i don’t know how to tell you what the gift is, or even exactly how i use it that makes that happen.  : part of it, part of it’s a mystery, um seeing the really clever way that they fit together i don’t necessarily know what happens that makes the connections click, but the way i do it with the ideas is the same way i do it with the scrabble pile, i look at them, i move them around, i place different ones next to each other, i shuffle them, i permute them, and i see whether they’re starting to feel right, whether they're starting to link up. so its not, i don't just sit there and stare and do nothing and a solution magically appears, i mentally play with it, i move the pieces around, i try to join them up in the best possible way, but i don't know how to tell you what makes me feel that they're getting close, and that i've got the right connection, there's a part of that i don't understand. i can tell you, you know, i have tricks, i have techniques, i have things that i do to speed it up and to increase the chances and its certainly effortful, um i am much more likely to spot the seven letter scrabble word if i'm really thinking about it, rather than just you know, sit and look at it and hope [laugh], that doesn't work, but its very hard to describe with any exactitude um beyond the basic tricks that i've learned how to do. there's something more than that going on subconsciously which is presumably another level of those same kinds of tricks, that i just can't necessarily put into words.  : um... on the whole very focused : i retain information pretty spectacularly, when i was younger i had close to total recall, not quite photographic but almost, i had, i had you know experiences where i could sit in an exam in high school and i could practically read the page in the textbook that had the answer. i had to invoke it when i was studying, it wasn't that i just glanced at it for a second and it was like a photograph was there, i had to tell myself that i was gonna remember it, but my memory was spectacularly good and for a lot of things it still is. it has gotten worse since i had kids. um, i'm not sure whether its really the kids or the aging process, its not as total as it used to be.  : um... about most things no. there are some things about which i am periodically oblivious and my family tells me about it but for the most part no. i'm not the classic absent minded professor.  : um, i would, i, i’m not impulsive. i do not have trouble inhibiting responses but that plays both ways on the creativity. um sometimes it makes me afraid to take risks, but it certainly also prevents me from leaping to a conclusion too quickly before really thinking through what the right way to look at things is, and as a result i often catch holes in things that other people have done. so i would say i'm quite good at inhibition response inhibition, its not always a plus.  : uhh, people who know me well would say i'm compulsive about at least certain things yes. : i do not think so. um... i, not really no : um... i think perhaps the thing that we really haven't touched on is that, we've talked about it mostly in the context of my academic work and the music, but it pops up in other funny places too. so for instance i make wildly creative halloween costumes for my kids, you know, they've been a grand piano with an opening and closing keyboard lid, um [inaudible, ~1:22:31] with an opening and closing tail, a duckbilled platypus, mount everest, all of these things get made by hand and, and it was started sort of deliberately, i always made my costumes with my mom but they were much more lets find spotted pajamas and put a clown nose on you kind of thing. they were not nearly as elaborate as the ones for my kids, kids have gotten, but my kids liked it and then they started challenging me, there's some things money can't make and i generally consider myself not a good maker of things, i'm not mechanical, um, but for certain kinds of crafts or creative things, i seem to be really good and i always have ideas about well how would i make all the pieces fit together with that, again its like i can see the whole thing and how it would happen, but its not mechanical or engineering, i don't, there's a distinct, i am not good at taking apart and putting together the car. its different from that. um, cooking also, i love to cook and i feel like i have very good instincts about trying new combinations. i'll start with a recipe, i'll learn oh flavor combinations that style of food but can i then go off on a tangent, yes. um, so there, there various areas like that where it pops up as well, and i think again there's that theme of being able to kind of see the whole picture and have a good instinct about how it will work, look, taste, feel, um that i don’t completely know how to describe where it comes from, but its definitely related to the work stuff, the music stuff, the language stuff.  : sure, its fun to do. i hope that we will learn something interesting [laughter] from the whole thing. i really have no idea how to process all the data i just gave you so [laugher] so that probably requires a whole new methods line of research. : sure, [laughter]. i will come down wearing my official study statistician hat and my study subject hat and we can carry on. : ok, ok thanks so much kendra. : engineering is the stepchild to science  : i would make a pitch that i'm the engineering side. not the science side. : ah okay yep  :  okay good well good good 
interviewer: but now what you do is really fascinating. i cant confess to get my head around it, but it sounds like you work with the environment in some pretty interesting ways :  yes i do and i used to do when i was at [university 1] actually as a graduate student i did more of the science side. i did surface chemistry and that type of thing for membrane processes for water and waste water. now i do more of the engineering systems side and sometimes its hard to make an argument that engineering innovation is um - stands on its own merit versus what we have decided is kind of science or basic research innovation. so uh anyway that’s kind of where that pitch of engineering came from is sometimes we do things in the lab that maybe don't have that basic element that i feel like are highly innovative and can be used in other areas and translational and that type of thing to make that argument i think sometimes challenging for engineering projects.
interviewer (3): yeah well how do you feel about what you did? and how it relates to innovation?  because it seems like innovation can occur whether its reducing something to practice or in the purely theoretical realm. so i'm just wondering, what are your thoughts about that?: right um huh that’s an open question um 
interviewer: that’s my favorite  kind of question. :  oh god. i thought the hard part of this was over. okay lets see um uh okay i think i guess i think for innovation i would put engineering and to my research has got more applied equal with basic research, um as long as its there is that translational component. i think as long as the innovations can be carried to other realms. and maybe the other realms are more limited like with basic science innovation it comes down to a core that can you know maybe be applied to a whole lot broader realm if its like - i'm babbling. if you're making an innovation in basic or engineering innovation maybe the realm it can be applied to is more narrow but the um the quickness to be received in application - is the speed that its received in an application is quicker so i don’t know yeah i think i'm being a little bit redundant.
interviewer (5): no its actually an intriguing area to explore. you know trying to understand i mean some of the dimensions you’ve highlighted about you know over what space is the translation you know its really quite interesting that does interact as well and what's the time frame that to occur.: yes and so we will get i will get people in my lab that are looking for a new material or a new coating for a material and want to see something very small scale if i show them processes that they've heard of integrated together in a system they're like "well where's the innovation". and it hurts because i understand where they're coming from but on the other hand how do they know how much time and thought it took to integrate - to develop and integrate these systems. but then yeah if it comes down to if its patentable actually we have success in patenting these systems. but um i don’t think that maybe the best course sometimes whereas you have the new material a new something and its a new more basic something and its easier to go you know the patent route. the obvious innovation route i think.interview (6): you know its fun in creativity research some people have adopted what they call the patent office test the non-obviousness of the discovery has to be evaluated and - but in terms of brain functioning you know we tend to focus on really any novel contribution that gets use. um and you know its evaluating that utility aspect that perhaps the easier one saying what's truly novel in a domain is sometimes more difficult for us. but thinking back over the things you've done over your career your professional career what are you the most proud?: uh my phd students who are - this came easy my phd students are now in academia and are for the most part fulfilled with their careers.
interviewer (7): huh that’s really nice now um how do you do that?: um i do so i do uh fully believe in the um - oh my gosh i just lost so i confess i was on vacation for two weeks and i checked no work email for two weeks. : so my this side of my brain hasn’t' been used. yesterday came home and kind of went through my emails but anyway um. : its standard. this is a word i would use all the time in training and mentoring phd students to go into academia. it’s a - anyway there's a word that if i used would just would be better than the other words that i try to use but anyway 
interviewer: it'll come to you in about 200 seconds : see this is why i need my brain scanned because i do have major brain issues. so anyway to teach them and show them the steps and to develop i guess develop the processes they need to first write a paper then start to sell their research through you know proposals and kind of the different approach you take to papers versus proposals versus conference presentations. and so um so i guess um i did it when i started in academia i was at the [university 2] and i certainly didn’t think my legacy would be my graduate students because it kind of worried me with them coming out with a phd from [university 2]. but now the students - and i haven't had any phd students yet from [university 3]- um but to see that they are placed in good schools in the us and international and um anyways so that kind of i realized that i enjoyed the process of working with them on developing the process not the - it wasn’t about getting the paper submitted it was about them learning to first write their first paper and then by paper #4 and me just barely getting in there. i guess at some point they realized that they wanted to do that as well, but it wasn’t my intention going in all my phd students would go you know so many phd students would go to academia. : oh yeah it’s a small group. when i was at [university 2] i had a lot of masters students too so its not anything grand but i think at some point i looked back and though okay so that’s what i enjoy doing and its seems its successful so that a good thing : because i am a process person  : it means at home my children learn processes for doing dishes  : here i'll tell you. i left them with the babysitter this morning, but i tell the babysitter - my children are almost 9 and 12 right. i just say almost 10 and 12 anyway but i tell the babysitter "you're not supposed to do the dishes you just need to make sure they do them, you know you don’t need to do them".  first they have to empty the dish drainer, then they have to empty the dish washer then anything that’s in the dishwasher that doesn’t fully isn't fully dry goes into the dish drainer but if i go into the kitchen and they've stacked the dishes on top of what were the dry dishes in the dish drainer /  : you know all hell breaks loose  : i mean you know there are processes i think for efficiency with my phd students in the beginning i wont edit their material electronically because they can go in and say accept all changes and not have to struggle through reading and understanding the edits that i make. so in the beginning all edits are on paper and then as they get to be better writers and there's fewer edits and they know they understand what they are correcting more then i'll do electronic edits or something. but yeah i'm i follow processes that i'm finding these millennials they are not so such process oriented people.  : yes exactly. not just not process oriented not paper oriented. you're exactly right. they think it is so old fashioned for me to do paper edits you know why would you do that if you can write if you can put them in electronically and i don’t have to all i have to do is accept all changes  : like i'm now trying to teach my kids to wipe the counters  : no i didnt i'm writing it down now  : spell the last name : okay no  : you know what that is - most of my days is to make it most efficient and the i am realizing you do lose that at some point pleasure follows along with efficiency, but then you reach a peak in efficiency and pleasure starts to drop. so especially over vacation i'm highly inefficient i'm trying to back off a little bit on efficiency and seek more pleasure. : right no its just i used to find that when i operated with the highest efficiency i felt the best yeah good about everything life but you know what it’s the kid component that works still for work pretty much but the kid component um i can get to a point of efficiency that my family - its painful i think  : what : oh  : see to get a most organized would be just painful to me : um okay so these days i would say its more step back and look from a bigger perspective. just as an example one process that we're working on - if you look at the membrane and the interface and the thermodynamics of salts and water at the membrane surface you would say this process is not doesn’t have a chance at being successful because the thermodynamics aren't just there. you know but what i think i do is uh try to step back from that and look at things more from a system perspective. so do the thermodynamics have to be  - you know does the driving force have to be high or is the thermodynamics are such are always going to have a low driving force can - could that work in this system? could that actually start to become a benefit in this system? and so that's what i'm doing right now um in the past and so yeah okay so and then in the past so i think it was the opposite when i did the more surface characterization work of okay um what can we actually prove happens at the interface and what are we speculating and can only hypothesize happens at the interface? and so i guess yeah - so what can we truly answer and how can we uh how can we prove it - where that’s kind of the old. but now it’s a bigger its stepping back to a bigger looking at it from a more realistic picture  : you know yes um i don’t know what started it. you know what so when i was at [university 2] um it actually started with a [name of government agency] project we were looking at direct potable ways to taking waste and converting it to the drinking water for a mission to mars scenario where you can't send up fresh drinking water and you can bring down waste water so you actually would have to um reuse directly the use the waste water. so that just started i wouldn’t say  - what i would say now is i have reestablished when i was a graduate student i worked briefly [water district 1]. i worked at [water district 2] for an engineering company and worked just for a summer at [water district 2] and um so they were kind of like internships. um and then when i came back to [university 3] i reestablished those and do a little bit of work for a lot of water districts from [city 1] down to [city 2] and um when i - it was the first few that people said "well you're a membrane expert what do you think about this system" and i think "well gosh i haven't thought about a real system in quite a while. i think about more future systems well what about one of those future systems" "could we apply that to this?" "well no there's a big gap in there" and so now i um i focus more on that gap. and before i came to [university 3] i focused on the future systems and i didn’t worry about the gap, but now i think with doing some um doing some independent panels and advisory things for these water districts i cant only talk about the future. so i'm minding the gap now um yeah and i don’t know even where what the question was or if i'm answered it. : for sure mostly those phd students. unfortunately the masters students um although they did theses i don’t feel like it really got a two way street where i learned as much as them as they were learning from me. so i would say it was those phd students and they - its not even it was they were critical. because i found that i kept tending to work with mechanical engineering - mechanical engineers. which was kind of funny in retrospect and not civil environmental not ones with civil environmental background but mechanical mechanical chemical and it was a little bit of a vision that maybe i thought about, maybe because i didn’t have a mechanical background that constrained me and i said hey can we do this and they said no it won't work because this is hotter this is cooler or high pressure or low pressure its not going to work well. without maybe this constraint that they had as having taken on the mechanical engineering courses what about this oh we could treat this and and so um it was those interactions on a blackboard in my office i think that were critical. and we - you know having those at the end of the day we didn’t know that we were getting ready to come to something interesting or develop something interesting but once we started just talking about - talking about the constraints the possibilities and then the constraints and then more possibilities and then the constraints and coming to something that maybe others didn’t come to  : but it took i - it for sure took at least one other student and at times my group was such that we had a couple other key contributors and that’s when it gets very exciting. but for sure i do it is i am very much need to talk things through think with multiple people. : uh yeah but on the other side i'm so worn out on the interdisciplinary. on the proposals from nsf required. i hate to say that the interdisciplinary's benefited me but you know what within a limited range it has definitely - i mean with other engineers i have what i'm trying to say i have not found that success with social scientists yet and i have tried and tried  : well there ya go! yeah so within science and engineering yes  : right yes exactly  : umm wow uh who i am i can answer you that for a long time technically who i am is narrow. my dad is an auditor or was an auditor my parents are from - so this is a not confidential information by any means but i would hate to have something taken out of context - but my parents are from [state] : okay well nobody would read it so it's okay. um my parents are from [state] they went to what was in middle [state] college or something, and my dad was recruited directly into the gao which was in the general accounting office of the federal government. now it’s the government - what is it anyway doesn’t matter my mom dropped out of college and they moved to the [city 3] area and that’s where i was born and my dad worked for the gao his entire career. um and so uh we - i grew up in a slightly - well i grew up in a very nice place that eventually [city 3] the rougher areas of [city 3] impinged on and my i think my local high school was the first to get metal detectors that was back in like the 80s early 80s. and so i went to a magnet science and tech high school and um that was probably a big transition point because my parents just wanted me to go to school and get good grades. and i never i don’t know its so different from today i never got home and got help with homework. there was never i knew i would go to college so my parents did put somehow put that out there but we were certainly not an academic household where anybody was a professor and there was no engineers in the house. which i do think is a little bit unusual. anyway but my dad being in now as i'm uh as i've become more reflective or whatever and i've looked back at me and my dad i see that the skills that have made me successful um are very similar to my dad - that my dad's auditing skills breaking something down and pulling it apart but for a long time i didnt see that i just thought - and then actually it was not until gosh i feel like i was like almost out of college that i realized two of my uncles his two brothers were engineers as well. so anyway there is a little bit of that i would say more analysis a little bit engineering that came from my dad. um uh so that's the i said the technical side of me and then so i made this my family made this choice for me to go to this science and technology magnet school. and there you when you were going into your junior year you had to choose between chemistry biology or engineering as kind of a major and so i chose engineering because it was known to be the easiest (laughs) so i wasn’t always looking for the greatest challenges. but anyway so and that's kind of where the engineering started as well  : okay : uh easy question. so i think um academia and um i'm going to call it general patenting are at odds with one another. so um this tension i learned fifteen years ago was um if we had if we were putting in a patent application and you know there's obviously you can't present before you've disclosed - i can't remember all the right words. but so it limited us and then it limited us into what in terms of what we could do for periods of time which i think is at odds with academia. um but no if i fast forward that to now i find that when i try to incubate something i let it ooze out to the point that um i guess i can't - i could see in the old days somebody sitting in an office maybe not going to conferences and not interacting a lot with others and coming up with an amazing work of art but the minute - like the minute i have my colleagues here and they want to know what i'm working we start talking and they give a little and i give a little all of a sudden i've kind of opened up something that i'm interested in and i know now there's certain people i can trust with that and certain people i cant. so anyway so i can't incubate so well and still keep i think now it's not so at odds with patenting but with what professors are being not required to do  but having to do which is sell ourselves keep you know sign us constantly have spotlight or an interest and you know your dean wants to show somebody through your lab and you can't - you have to share with them and you have to be developing new things and targeting specific audiences. so i just don’t know how you people could be successful incubators in this day and age of being a professor : what would be an example of the prostheses?  : right um i do wow that’s a harder question now you got me. uh i don’t have a quick answer. i will say i do strongly strongly encourage my students that anything they can say they can illustrate better. um and so i like to see um - and i know powerpoints are on the way out its all about getting up and just talking without powerpoints but especially uh i think challenging or in bigger concepts can be an animated powerpoint is worth more than a thousand words in understanding stuff. so the mind maps type thing i would say i get and i use. as far as the maintenance of saving combinations whew i think i don't i do not have - i i'm going to just answer something else you didn’t ask. i am very aware of people who have really good memories and i used to think wow those people are brilliant but now - now i don’t necessarily. i realize that person just has an outstanding memory and i think there's a lot of benefit to that and it can lead to brilliance but it alone represent brilliance and i do not have a good memory. i write a lot of notes i find i don’t go back and look at them i try to that that the process of writing something and thinking about it will keep it in there longer and i don’t know if that the maintenance the update or neither. on the other hand i do find maybe what's unique about my memory is i will hear something that i think opens doors and whereas my colleagues are listening to the small details i'll hear something on a much bigger broader take that was a perspective or a perspective i haven't heard before that takes my brain in a different direction. again i didn’t answer your question really  : if we're saying creative achievement in the the way i think of creativity - but you've said the study is not limited to the - i would say the inhibition. because that's exactly what i'm talking about when i talk about having one of my students or a colleague in my office going over ideas. i prefer small group of people because in a big room well these days in a big room you don't want to share your ideas because other people do run off with them. but um but i have to have to wonder if this is my female side an environment that i trust where my colleagues not going to look at me and say "no you cant go that way that’s wrong" because that shuts me down and makes me uh uncomfortable. it feels very inhibited and so with trusted colleagues i'm i think dropping the inhibition is very important. um but inhibiting habits i don’t - in carrying out i don’t not even carrying out creativity. i think there's a whole other creativity that comes from habits because if something's outside if you are carrying out your analysis which i kind of consider a habit and then all of a sudden - and this does occur to me you see this outlier i'm listening to a presentation and i'm kind of ignoring all the itty bitty stuff and you know about to doze off and then i hear an outlier kind of and that's that becomes the interesting part so i would say both just both yeah both are important letting down your inhibition but also keeping those habits. not inhibiting your habits  : is it the people are more agreeable tend to be : ah less agreeable tend to be more creative  : um... agreeableness. well i guess i would start the challenging - yes a nice not agreeable person good. but like i said i want to i the best work is with people who will challenge but for me again i think it’s a limitation of mine to do it in a nice way and a careful way and i wish i weren't like that i wish i could be in a room and say no its not like this, you know. but that just is not my environment so the openness i agree and the agreeableness i could agree as long as that person was nice for a good word nice nice and challenging versus mean and challenging. that’s key for me. : definitely but definitely decreasing with the millennials. i notice millennial women are just - they in this sense they get out there and they'll argue something and i'll think she's wrong she's wrong but she's doing it so passionately nobody would know. and whereas in the past i believe it was more men who would be confrontational in a more public environment. um and less - again the confrontation and the challenges just it really just depends i do agree you have to have that i mean that is what the conflict or whatever has to be overcome for something new to develop just how its done i guess is the difference. and i do think like i look at my daughters in school they get so much um more training in public presentation and debate and arguing a point and so i think that is what's changed with millennials. i think - and i do think its a good thing because like i said it seems to i let notice less a difference in genders with regards to that one aspect  : right exactly  : um uhh its funny when i thought about this coming up today oh will i remember i think that’s it. if we're close to ending i did want to ask you if you have looked at the testing i did - i don’t know if you call it testing or whatever. : it’s interfering. that camera is inserting thoughts into my head so. : aimed at me that way, i can feel the beam.  : functional mri. i’ll go functional mri. : i had an incredible one and a half to two year period in my life where i had come out of medical imaging background, which is its whole different story, some place i never wanted to be. and at the time mr imaging took too long. right? we would spend an hour giving a couple pictures, it was just silly. and i spent much of my time thinking about how to make the scanners faster. and i went to a conference and i heard a couple of individuals speak about this thing called echo planar imaging, which was a laboratory curiosity. and it promised to be able to take pictures in a small fraction of a second. and this was a startup company with three scientists and a couple hundred thousand dollars. and they decided to do something very audacious, which is they tried to make a commercial version of this thing that would actually work. so, i went to the conference and two weeks later i quit my company which was [company 1] - actually might have been less than two weeks - and said “this is what i’ve gotta do.” so i packed up and moved to [city 1] and i became the fourth scientist in the company. we recruited one other really interesting character who you might know, [scientist 1] - brilliant, brilliant, brilliant scientist. and we set out to try and make this machine. and over the course of one year we went from design drawings to something we could scan with that produced actually very high quality images. i must’ve spoken at twenty conferences over the course of that year, just things were happening so quickly - invention, invention, invention, invention. so i did a lot of the sort of core technology for coding but also was literally winding gradient coils and epoxying wires and amplifiers and all this other jazz and developing the... processing algorithms. so, i don’t know how long you want to listen to me blabber about this but there was a problem that we could acquire pictures rapidly with this but then it was interesting to be able to get them onto the screen quickly. and we were using a massively powerful ibm x386 computer. the best 8836 computer you could get, which is just stupid right? so basically useful as a word processor. so we had to develop engineering to be able to get real-time images and so we did that, ultra fast coding and artifacts, yadda yadda. but my official role at the company was chief application scientist, which is the same thing as only application scientist and my job more or less was to find uses for this instrument. and the company, the investors, everybody thought that this was the device for taking pictures of the heart, ‘cause the heart moves very quickly, and scanning this fast you’d freeze motion and you know, we did that. but i’d come from enough years of experience in mri that said if you wanna make this commercial, mri machines are machines for taking pictures of the brain. and 65% of all scanning was neural in practice, 2 or 3% was cardiac and the rest was like knees, and we did knee stuff. we did some cool kinetic knee studies showing you know, how the patella moves under certain kinds of stress, and so on. but i decided that because i was in a small company, convince everybody that unless we had a machine which took good pictures of brains, we didn’t have a product. so we spent a lot of time changing how we take pictures of brains and came up with some very, very clever cool techniques, many of which are now - most of which are now in products that ge, siemens, you know, all these others use. and as part of this application scientists role my job was to interact with other potential customers to think about what it is we were gonna do. and so i hooked up with my now colleagues at [college 1] and we first started with doing cardiac and we got involved in a project where a guy named [scientist 2] was wanting to see how blood distributes in the heart. and you had to do fast scanning, although there were ways to acquire the heart, his stuff absolutely required ultra fast scanning. so you inject an agent into the blood, you see it go into the heart and then into the coronary arteries. and this tracer study showed that we could see blood flow changes in real-time, effectively. then a post-doc working at [college 1], a guy named [scientist 3], came to his boss [scientist 4] with a proposal that said look, you know, that’s how pet works. so how you do blood flow imaging in the brain with radioactive materials - i’m saying this for your camera, you know this stuff. and shouldn’t we be able to see brain function? so there was only one scanner in the world at the time, it was the one we built and it was in the factory. and [scientist 3] came over and half a dozen other people came over, somebody to do contrast agent injections. [scientist 3] was really good at ideas, but he was not safe around an experiment and, you know, basically [scientist 3] had to be held in the corner ‘cause if he’d touch something, nobody trustable was gonna happen, but so we did those experiments and what happened basically is that you inject a contrast agent into the blood, you could see it flow through the brain, depending on how much blood was going through that part of the brain you could make a calculation about what part of the brain demanded more blood and then infer from that brain activity. and that changed neuroscience, really amazing change in neuroscience. the first data from that - well the first public presentation, we actually snuck into a conference. we had a paper on some other topic and decided it was close enough that we could go up there and show the movies to the audience. more about priority data i think than anything else and then we published it in science and one of the sort of peak moments of my career was doing the artwork for the cover of science for that, and it’s - that is a - what’s the word i’m looking for? an iconic image. there’s a particular picture of the brain and it’s been replicated oh so many times. i find it in art books; i find it all over the place. : yeah, so, it’s a very proud moment. i mean that stuff is a very proud moment. the science magazine had an advertisement for itself in a later issue and it was a guy in antarctica reading science magazine…what was on the cover of science magazine? you know, my stuff. and so that was great. but also during that one year in addition to the invention of functional mri, i developed means of scanning hardwood to look for defects. so you buy a log and you get more money for it if you cut it into pieces which don’t have crap inside. so with the fast scanner, i realized that you could go “beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep” and scan a thirty foot log. right? so we did that. those are sort of fun pictures. we did - we showed, with another buddy of mine [friend 1] that by different ways of calculating the real-time pictures, you could actually visualize turbulence in water. and there is no other method that allows you to do that, and we were able to show the transition to turbulence in, you know, in sort of bottles of the heart, but also we did some work with a geologist who was studying fluidized sand and, you know, very, very fun work. we - one of the things i put together was a way of scanning on the machine where you could scan the whole body as a single pass. so what happens is that the scanner takes picture, picture, picture, picture, and we just set up the table to move at constant rate, and you get three millimeter sections through the body, so you go in one way and you get one kind of contrast we call t1 contrast and you go the other way and you get t2 contrast out of the thing and now you have a whole body scan in three minutes, or two minutes. and that’s an application that should be out there, but… well first of all, yes i’m proud of it. all this stuff happened in this really crazy short period of time. that one’s not out there because i showed it at a major conference and somebody stood up in the audience, a guy who is very famous, this spine radiologist named [scientist 5], and [scientist 5] was the person really responsible for understanding that you could use mri to show disk disease in the lower spine. published a lot of papers in it and then it turned out that there was an epidemic of lower spine diseases and disk prolapse because most of it doesn’t mean anything. and the mri was showing all kinds of stuff. so [scientist 5] had like a thing about this, so i presented at the conference and he stood up in the audience and that’s the stupidest idea ever because what’s gonna happen is we’re gonna find so much occult disease that this - the impact on health care costs are gonna be out of control. one of those funny things. it’ll come back. i suspect it’ll come back. during that year i also hooked up with other people at [college 1], a guy named [scientist 6], who was interested - still is interested - in the idea of trading brain tumors with non-invasive or moderately invasive means, in particular with deposition of heat in the brain. so we cooked up a way to measure temperature using the mri and i developed this real-time temperature-monitoring thing and the idea was that he could shine his laser lights in, we could see exactly what was being cooked and when it was done, and so that was fun. there were literally dozens of these things. and starting at the company until probably the end of the first year, i got invited to be a - i mean i was a kid - i got invited to be a guest plenary speaker at the major conference and just produced this sort of catalog of cool things and published a review article on this that, it just, i’m so proud of that particular collection of things. it’s like so many of ‘em are not yet, have not yet been reinvented, you know. they’re sitting there, they’re cool ideas, they belong in there, so that was great. really fun.  : really interesting question. i was working at [company 2] in california, but that was - so i worked at this other medical instrument company [company 2] for about two years and i did that right out of graduate school and right following a divorce. and that divorce, completely amicable it is and all that stuff, but i went out from having a home life into this job at [company2] where i was travelling on a plane at least three times a week; different places. and zero connected social life for two years. i mean it’s just, you know, one place to the next, one conference to the next, blah blah blah. and so certainly there was the potential to focus, you know, this sort of built up of if i could sit in one place, do a lot of stuff, and so that had to have been a factor in it. i was untethered from anything. i was working around people who believed in the project and believed in me and were incredibly supportive. you know, nobody questioned whatsoever what it is i was doing, at least from the inside. people from the outside questioned it. still continue to question these kinds of things, you know. cannot tell you how much pushback we got for this scanner, which was capable of taking bad pictures really fast, you know. or other thoughts about it, where, you know, it’s very hard for people to connect those dots and - but internally, very, very strong support for that. this was also a period in which i was musically very active. i had a very cool jazz band and, you know, it was a big life of living arts, science, you know. and, so, that’s like one year i can really point to as the most fun in creativity i’ve had. : no. : no. : cool. : oh then i’ve met him.  : freedom to fail... i don’t think that came up. i mean honestly, you know, it was just walking into an environment that had so much potential, you know, that there was something new that was going to work every single day. diffusion. that’s when we invented diffusion imaging or tractography was sort of came out of that group also. there was this paper by [scientist 7]  you probably have heard of but echoplanar imaging is what made diffusion imaging possible. we did those that year. : when i was able to talk. : i don’t know that anybody else had to do it. i was always fascinated by how things worked and i was always - i don’t like to use words like this, but i’m gifted as an engineer. i can see how things work and i can make them work and, you know, somebody shows me a machine and i, i have no problems. this is what it does, how it happens. and that, i mean it’s been that way since i was a kid. : "and the engineer says i’ll fix this." yeah i have heard that story, it’s cute. it’s cute. anecdote for you: so when i’m hiring people in the lab, i ask them “how many gears are on a ten-speed bicycle?” most people haven’t a clue how many gears there are on a ten-speed bicycle, but if you have the least bit of sort of engineering knowledge or an engineering type, you’ve looked at the bike and so you know how it works. right? there are seven gears on a ten-speed bicycle. two in front, five in back. that’s all there is. and it’s just funny how some people think about the world that way and some people don’t. : i wanna be cute and say never, and there’s some truth to that. i thought about being pre-med but sort of looked at the course list and decided i didn’t want to deal with that and when i went to college i enrolled as a music major. and then i was very dissatisfied with academic music, dropped out of college, became a musician full-time for a while and then decided i wanted to go back to school and i went back to school at a different institution. i started at [college 2], went to [college 3], and at [college 3] i went in there thinking about designing musical instruments, so i was in mechanical engineering. but all the cool work at [college 2] was done in electrical engineering so i switched over to that and then i - this is the period when i had my most depressive episodes and i dropped out of school and i came back to school again, this time to finish up at [college where i entered in human biology because i’d decided i had an interest in how people hear and how the auditory system works, how it processes sounds. and then went in, finished up my degree in that and then went to graduate school in neuroscience with a specific interest in trying to understand how consciousness works, but that wasn’t the question for neuroscience at the time. it’s not something you would say in polite company. so i became a different kind of neuroscientist and, you know, people mostly if they come up with a job title for it, most people say physicist. but i have no degrees in physics and yeah. i’m just - i don’t know. i don’t know how to really answer that. i did not at any point realize i was going to have the career i was going to have, nor did i plan any of it.  : i had - when i was in, an undergraduate, i shared a house with now a very long-term friend, a gentleman named [friend 2]  who was a philos - he was a graduate student in philosophy. and my first year in college, i took philosophy 101 and i loved it, but i went back and shared a home with the guy and we would - just all these cool philosophy books, that’s what we read at home and talked about all the time. i got hooked up with the philosophy graduate professors through [friend 2], and so spent a lot of time thinking that way. so, that was a massive influence on how i think about the world. another massive influence was playing music. you know this very well, but, you know, guitar players plug their guitar into an amplifier through a device, through such a widget that changes the sound and there’s a bazillion such things. you know, fuzz boxes and wah wahs and you know, these things. but back in high school, and i started with that. i decided that it would be interesting to figure out how those things work and then start making them. so i learned electronics in high school by studying those things and most of what i learned in there i still use in the lab. most of the devices i build are probably about as sophisticated as the ones i built in high school in terms of knowing the tech. so that was a huge influence. and then, you know, there are people who pass through who have been amazingly intellectual in my life. here at [college 4], i’ve been here for twenty-two years. and about five years ago, i started on a program to try to get a university-wide grant, and this is something called science and technology center, the nsf awards. they’re large; they’re twenty-five million dollar grants. typically we do fifty million dollar grants. and i decided that it would be interesting because of who [college 4] is - are we running out of time? (interviewer answers phone call) so, where am i? yeah. so at [college 4], so, you’d appreciate this ‘cause you know this place. i said what’s one thing about this campus that distinguishes us from anybody else? that’s imaging. we are the leader in imaging in design media arts, we’re leaders in computer graphics, we’re leaders in digital image processing, we’re leaders in medical imaging, we’re leaders - we have the best high-resolution electron microscopy in the world. we’re awesome at this. so i said, “let’s do this. let’s coalesce around it.” so i wrote this large proposal and some other time i’ll tell you the fate of all of that. but the consequence was that i met everybody in this campus who does imaging and, including all the deans and chairs and all the other stuff. and that hooked me up with the mathematicians here. and i have - it’s just such a change in the way i appreciate the world to have had the chance to work with people who are leading that field. because i’m not strong in math and, you know -inaudible, 25:33- they’re strong in math and sitting down and learning it and rethinking things. i have - again, i don’t want to do a long interview with this, but we at [college 4] have a focus in applied math on sparsity. sparsity’s a very interesting topic : [mathemetition 1]. right. and [mathemetition 2] and others. so as i’ll be happy to tell you sometime when you wanna hear about it, i’ve had insights into how the brain works and why the brain is optimized as a decoder of sparse data and how in many portions of our physiology we really built in to do that. we fill in like crazy, and filling in is a response to sparsity. it’s just like thinking metaphorically about the math and then how it impacts things. and those are influences from other people for sure. : among the most amusing factors about the brain are the fact that it supports our consciousness. and whether or creates it or not, that’s an opinion, it's a philosophical belief of materialism versus dualism but whatever it is, there’s virtually nobody practicing who doesn’t think that that’s the work of the brain to do. and it is... for me it’s the reason for studying the brain. for me it's, it's, you know, it’s cool to think about. treating epilepsy is something i spent a lot of time worrying about diagnostics - i’m very interested in diagnostics on psychiatric disorders and these others, but in practice, what’s cool about the brain is that is supports consciousness and the philosophers who spent a lot of time thinking about what that means and so a lot of my thinking about that is based on reading in that literature. [philosopher 1], [philosopher 2], the old guys and [philosopher 3], the new guys. philosopher 4].  : so there are philosophers who've put together very specific ideas about how brains do their work. [philosopher 4]’s a really interesting case. he wrote a book called “[philosopher 4's book]”. [philosopher 4] is principally known for his work on evolution and it’s brilliant. but he put forward a particular model, and there are aspects of that model that are testable and so that’s organized—some of the experiments that i do. he has this what he calls “competing drafts model” and the idea sort of is there might be a thousand things in your brain which are combatting each other for your attention and one or a tiny number of them wins, and that’s what you’re doing at the moment. but that implies a level of parallel activity in the brain that actually you can study. right? and you can study changes in the brain as a function of attention—that’s one of the major directions in my laboratory is modulation and control of attention and, yeah. : for dalí, right? even worse.  : thomas pynchon might be a good current choice. : in my personal experience, there are several things, which were just of the do, do, do, do, do. my favorite year in mri had that characteristic—it’s idea, experiment, result—a week. it’s just bang, bang, bang, you could do those. and that’s when the physical problems of getting that work out are finger-painting skills. you know? a half a dozen lines of code and you got it, right? there are other things where my whole interest in sparsity and trying to understand what that means, it’s been incubating for years and you know, i sort of keep coming back to it and saying, you know now that it’s baked in the oven for a while, what else is there in that? and i’ve yet to produce a major paper on this thing ‘cause i’m just trying to think it through. i have another one that i’ve been toying with—i’m sorry—on the question of linearity and—again i don’t know if you want details when you’re doing your camera interview thing, but linearity means essentially that what comes in is represented in the output in a high fidelity manner. and as a very technical meaning, which is that if you put in energy at a given frequency, all that comes out is energy at that same frequency. maybe a little louder, maybe a little softer. that’s what linearity means. and a non-linear system, you put something in at one frequency and other frequencies come out. and those things are contaminants of the signal. you cannot really function if your senses are non-linear. it’s some metaphorical low-level end. the stuff that doesn’t belong in the signal is a series of hallucinations, you know, it’s just junk. it’s perceptions, which don’t map to the real world. so every sensory system we have is set up to be linearized. and the way you linearize things is you only make your measurements around a small point. so in your eyes, your retina operates over a very minimal range of light levels, where it’s adequately linear, and your iris changes the amount of light coming into your eyes so that you keep your eyes in a linear range. your ears do the same thing and your muscles do the same thing, this kind of stuff. and so i’ve been toying around a lot with linear and non-linear in signals—particularly bio signals, and that’s like—it’s nascent. i know i want to go there with it, but i know i’m gonna have to work on it for another couple of years before i have anything organized to say about it so some things…you know your brain does a good job of working on ‘em when you’re not and having them present and being aware that they are something you are working on, that’s a good thing. sort of coming back to it and saying i should, you know. it’s cooked in there for another six months, maybe there’s something new to get from that. : oh good.  : i’m not enamored of working memory. neuropsychologists are enamored of it. it’s something, you know, like back when you first decided to study neuropsychology it was one of the concepts they threw in front of you, and you know, something we can measure. we got like the nbac test. it's so cool we can measure this thing. but honestly there's a lot to be said for flow. there's a lot to be said for not paying attention to anything but what is immediately in front of your nose. certainly people who are jazz improvisers, it just is not about working memory, i don't think. i don't think it's about simultaneous concepts exactly. : for me when i play jazz music, the new ideas emerge the same way they do in a good conversation with a smart person that—or with several smart people—and listening and this is what you have to say about this, da da da, and this is what i have to say about this, da-da da-da da-da. right? and that dialogue is what's going on for me in jazz creativity. that's different than compositional—i don’t know how it would be like.  : well, you know, it's learning all the time for sure. it's learning. and learning is, you know, if the brain has anything to do with it, the brain is being changed by learning, i'm sure of that. : it's credible, but the association of the default mode network to things like, you know, deep thinking, meditative states, internally directed thoughts, this kind of stuff is all metaphorical. i don't - it fell out of looking at the data as a potentially interesting artifact. that there is a pattern to what the brain is doing when you don't specifically know what it's doing, and that's what i know about the default mode network for real, right?. that those are the data. in terms of its association to something that's not task-positive because it couldn't be by definition, but which is somehow required for this internal task, those data are thin. thin thin thin. and to try and find some sort of process of deep thought, internally directed thinking, blah blah blah, which engages the default mode network in a controlled way, those data aren't there. that's what i've seen. so—but, you know, there are certainly something to be said for discounting your sensory inputs, discounting your other external stuff. and whether that implies default mode network or not, that's something different. attention modulates that. you know, you downregulate your sensory cortex when you're not attending. and you could consider that to be a mode of engaging default mode network because default mode network is more or less defined by those conditions. : as a neuroscientist or as an engineer? : i have impulse control disorders. i mean i do, and, you know, i - it's the cost of being me. whether that's a cost that is a cost of being creative, i don't know. you know? i mean i really don't. i - there are people who are in the mode, as you know, the "just do it" mode, and you could think about that as a high impulsivity, you know, "just put this stuff out there".  : as a neuroscientist, i have no opinion on that. as a human living with being myself, it probably facilitates it. probably the fact that i'm - i was out with my sister today and they have a dog and she didn't have a leash with her, which is a problem for a dog owner and you gotta do something about it and so i said "well, you know, there ought to be a solution for that". and rather than pay attention to the other context of everything else that we were doing, i spent time going off on this "how do you handle this problem?" and i don't know. i mean to the point that i have no idea whether they were interested—but i was still blabbering on about it, you know. and i have a great solution. it's a great solution. it is that you make a dog collar which has velcro on the outside of it and leash that wraps onto it and stays in place and the dog collar is always available to you. it's not a great dog collar, it's one in the emergency when you didn’t have a dog collar. and it's a good idea. i think it's a good idea. but there's a impulsivity aspect to that that it just is in my head that this is what i gotta do right now. right now.  : ahh, okay, so uhh it's actually a part for which we get not so much recognition.  uhh but when i started out as an undergrad i wanted to see how chemistry and electronic structure were coupled and i set out a bunch of different ways, that's what guided what i chose for my phd and later for postdocs, and i thought it was going to be a career long adventure. : and then when i was an assistant professor, we basically figured out how to do it and were doing it every day. uhh so we got the you know, first paper out in the field and started it and nobody particularly cared until fairly recently, now and it's sort of come back to prominence, we're putting together a uh review with people around the world but yeah. : yeah, you bet, right. so uh, the thing i came upon as a postdoc was early in the days of what are called scanning tunneling microscopes. : so uhh i went to [research center 1] for post doc and we were trying to measure the chemical identity of single molecules or parts of molecules, and very focused on that. it took 13 years before anybody did it, uhh but you know. : that's what we went and did every day, but what we discovered with this microscope that we built was that we could look at how a molecule changed the electrons of the surface around it, and then we could into it from that based on our knowledge of chemistry, how that, how other molecules would interact with those changes : and they're much, at much greater distances than normal chemical distances, and later we were able to show the effect and catalysis in other areas and guide the precise assembly of the structures. we also figured out how to move atoms around, that was, that was what was sort of most famous from that lab and that was right in my last four days. : but when i worked there, i think to me is i think a little less interesting than being able to put on chemical goggles really. : and look at a surface with a better than atomic resolution and in the same way that a molecule would see it or part of a molecule would see it.  : yeah, based on the orbitals that are filled and empty and their particular energies, and where they're located with respect to one another. : so it can use that to fit pieces of molecules together even like a jigsaw puzzle. : and you can design them... : ...if you so choose to, to, there's a guy at stanford, his whole career is based on that.  : anyway, that isn't what our lab is known for, but it's what i'm most excited about. : and that we get this vision of this tiny world : well, i had some idea in advance that there was a progression of instruments, they'd start in physics and then they'd move to physical chemistry and then they'd move to analytical chemistry, and then they'd move to biology and so i decided i'd go into the most advanced instrument in this ability to look at what was where on a surface and how and how it was changed, and then, spin the entire range as soon as i started my independent career. so you can follow x-rays and, and nmr, mri and so forth, those all started in physics, so i just went to the source to low temperature physics and then said ok let's see what we can do with this, outside of this field. and i'd seen other people do things a little bit like that, not as big a range maybe but... : my first research advisor made artificial skin for burn victims, he came from physical chemistry. i couldn't get a job in any chemistry labs when i was a freshman, and he took me in and so, you know, his advice was well go you know learn something and then apply it, uhh... : ...and if you can basically apply it elsewhere. : so it was more or less that. : right, yeah i'm very visual that's definitely true : there is, yeah i mean we can quantify so that's interesting too. so there's the qualitative "okay, we know this atom would go here or in a molecule, this part of the molecule would be attracted into this position." but then there's also a way by using a disc room compressive sensing sparsity that's what we do know with (?, 5:30) [individual 1] to quantify that better than any theorist could calculate, so you can really understand the potentials and challenge theorists to, you know, do better than they're able to do now. : yeah : continue that? (~5:55) : my heavity (muffled laughing) : my heavity.. well yeah a lot of people say you know, you know do something that's going to work... : ...and you know get your career going, i had no sense of that whatsoever. i really just had this idea of a goal and i had a hard time getting a job because physics departments wanted me in their chemistry departments, and chemistry and physics or applied physics somewhere else at each university. and when i got hired at [university 1], there was sort of confusion uhhh over hiring me into a field where i'd never even met anybody and so they were snickering that, you know, i wasn't really an (?, 6:32) chemist was the position, and i tried to turn down the interview but they got me started and then i didn't really understand having come from [research center 2] and [research center 1] what getting a lab going and all uhhh meant. so it took a year to do the construction, another year and a half to do the instrument design, another year to get the first data, another year after that to get the you know first data that we could publish and by that time, you know paper time, my wife thought i was going to get fired.  : laughing (as well)...which you know...i came pretty close, you know, and i think that's not uhhh that's not so uncommon i think. there's a whale (?, 7:15) at cal tech and dervan at cal tech had a similar experience where they pushed very hard to get something and then they, you know, tipped over the, tipped over the line at the end, but you know it's important not to be a revisionist. : and so if i really had been strategic career wise, maybe i wouldn't have done that, but i didn't really care what, i mean, yeah. i wanted my own self-respect. what i was advised by assistant professors is, make sure whatever you do you have your own self-respect and then you're not going to trust your colleagues to take care of your dog by the time the you come up for tenure... : ...so why would you worry about it, you know what they're going to say about your life, and i just maybe uhh adopted that a little earlier.  : yeah, well we didn't know it was possible, i mean i don’t think anyone knew it was possible. it was based on you know an early discovery, and also like chaos between fields. so you know i would have an argument every day with... i had a chemistry background and so we were basically pattern recognition people, you show me a spectrum i'll tell you it's a spectrum, and i'll sign the peaks, and the temperature physicist i worked with was uhh his strategy was find a resonance and map it with the best signal that was possible and then from that you'll understand the system. so everyday we'd argue in the morning over coffee, in the evening over drinks but, and our experiments never worked was the other advantage we had. so we'd argue over whether to measure the very same molecule the next day over using the other guys idea or go onto a different molecule and do the same measurement there because we were interested in these bumps on the surface basically when we measured them... : … and so having those arguments. but what the strategies were and then adding later into that biology, we'd do 10 of the 12 experiments and one turns blue and you scoop it out and go on. i like all those different approaches to problems at the same time in my group, and so i think since then uhhh very quickly in starting my independent career, i just started pulling people from all different fields. and i, enjoy you know going in unexplored areas. at first it was in part because i didn't want to read literature so i had to find a place there was no literature.  : now it's a little different in that i have a journal that i read 9,000 papers a year – laughing- as they come in. so i'm very, i think a much better scientific uhh direction now but at first it was guided a bit by just finding some unexplored area and going into it in enough depth to understand some key parts and then see where those might be, uhh might be useful. : yeah, i was interested in that when i was little. yeah i always wanted to be an astronomer uhh when i was very small. space program, you know stay up at night watch the moon landing kind of thing. until my brother came home and blew things up in technicolor in the driveway- he was a chemist, much older, so that converted me over to chemistry and then i didn't like any chemistry class i took until i got some graduate spectroscopy class that was essentially puzzle solving, so i liked that aspect of it and i, i would say i gained more of a directed you know this would be something important to do when i met ann, who you also met for this, this study, she sort of shamed me into doing something that would actually matter as opposed to amusing my own curiosity everyday and different topics, and so we started to collaborate and then i picked up some of that uhh driven, do something with these resources and capabilities.  : we have fun –laughing- its hard to imagine how we.. yeah. : it was just curiosity. i'm always interested. i find myself generally interested in a lot of different things and i'm probably more interested in things if i think no one understands them and so i like, i like to figure things out. or, often even figure out how to figure things out, so i like developing new tools as a result of that. and it might be methods in math or might be new instruments, or i might be adding new capability to an instrument with a particular target. so for instance measuring structures without averaging. so my next thing is we figure out how to get uhhh alzheimer's forming amyloids, and see where the metal ions sit, they're not periodic so you can't get them on x-ray structures and you can't, there aren't enough of them to measure with nmr. and so we have some new capabilities and biomolecules that i think no one's had before and there were a lot of nonperiod or non-crystalline structures that turn out to be significant. and so just getting our toes into that now, but we'll, we think we have a couple of different strategies to that in a much bigger way. it's that kind of thing that's really fun for me. : oh no kidding : i tend to get along with just about everybody... : so i certainly recognize that in a lot of scientists, some are driven by proving their high school teachers wrong. the most senior (inaudible, ~13:50) director kind of people, their whole career is driven by "i was sure that what that guy said was wrong" and you know near retirement saying that too uhh, yeah. i would say, i don’t think that's me, i mean i'm curious to know what the answers are. i don’t necessarily want to prove someone right or wrong, i want to test you know what is right, uhhh, yeah. and i would say i respect people who take that whip particularly in our field, we have a lot of things that are very controversial, so you can tell who is a scholar in my view by their response to when someone attacks them. and if they're just after the answer you can tell that by their response what experiments would you do, to determine between what you're saying and what i'm saying, and i mean i'm attracted to that rather than saying "so and so must be wrong, let's go after them." my advisor also, um my thesis advisor would sometimes cannibalize his academic children by seeing them get something wrong and then doing an experiment, and people didn’t get tenure on that basis, uhh, so i would categorize him in that category... : ..of looking for errors and then going after them. : yeah let's back up for one second because one thing that may be useful is, one thing i like to do is expose problems. i have this thing, i set up a [organization 1] a theme based discussions, so you get someone to say here is what would revolutionize my field if we could do it. so we did that over the weekend with this new dentist we stole away from uhh [university 2] where he said look, here are the chemical signals and organisms that if you have them in your mouth, they tell you you're going to have some significant negative impact, and so we just went through and i brought in a couple of microbiologists, bioengineers, to say okay, you guys figure out which of the microbes you can...beeping: 20 minutes already! bla bla bla, i talk a lot, and i haven't been able to talk all weekend because [individual 2] 3 in h declines today, so yeah you bet i'm, sorry you're going to get the brunt of that- and then we'll do the chemical signals within the mouth and figure out how to do swipes or something else to get at those. and that's a general you know i, i'd like to sort of institutionalize that process, of figuring out who the right people to work with are, and then go after those, and that’s why the [initiative 1] and [initiative 2] and all those things are interesting. uhh.. so wait.. back to mentors.. okay, so uhhh my first uhh real mentor that i (inaudible, ~16:39) didn't really interact with him so much, undergrad advisor would bring me in once a week and have me propose a problem and then he would basically attack me like a defense and then ultimately throw a paper proposal at me, you know here are the people who did it, and by the time i finished, that was about 2.5 years, at least i was proposing new things. and we are still friends, i went back to his birthday symposium last year and he stayed, he was out here giving an endowed lecture, stayed with us for five days. my thesis advisor, very different than that. uhhh had not so much interaction, i mean we had a big group 40-something, very little creativity, uhhh in that lab in that you would take data for 6 hours at one point in a molecular, cross- molecular beams and then you either had the signal noise you needed, you'd move the detector 2 degrees, and do the same thing for the next 6 hours. most of the time spent fixing the instrument, terrible for me because he didn’t like to have a conversation. you'd ask him a question and he either had the answer and would give it to you and that was the end of the conversation or he didn't have the answer in which case he didn’t want to talk about it. and uhhh, so terrible experience, and oddly what happened after he got nobel prize the year i graduated. he moved to be the head of science in [country 1], head of [research center 3], the job, [inspiring person 1]- or head of bioengineering and chemical engineering just took, and then he tried to change the education system in [country 1], wrote a column on morality every week in the newspaper, which considering i think he never had any challenges in his life. laughing- it would've been hard for him to do and then now he's a big environmental person, he just gave out the [award 1] and he's like head of scientific societies in the world for a while. so he went through this very dramatic change, i think cause he felt like he had to give back, but that wasn't what he was like when i worked with him. then uhh, two postdoctoral advisors, one was just like danny devito, and intentionally chose someone who will talk about anything, and didn't matter if you didn’t know some of the inputs within 20 orders of magnitude, you can make your best guess and i love (emphasis) [inspiring person 2], and we still play with him a lot as well and his wife, he's head of the [foundation 1] now. but that was like my ideal uhh, how you interact with someone, and how you look at problems, didn't have to be something you were working on, how you sort of compare things, and i uhh i still enjoy, enjoy time with him whenever i can get it. and then i worked for this guy [inspiring person 3] at [research center 1] who was a little too close in age and career, i was his first postdoc and half the people there, thought he was my postdoc because i would order him around, and that didn't go well- laughing- and then i left a year to the second after i got there to start my academic career. but yeah that was very tense, i think if you asked him to name his postdocs he wouldn’t, he was an odd guy, you know he won the [award 2], and in a sense he didn’t invite anybody in his family, not even his mother or wife, and so [family member 1] and i were there, cause at the [award 2] chair, we kind of took care of him through that and uh he retired and sails around on a boat now, and was good at getting attention but not really driven to do something important.interview: so that's quite a diversity of characters, so what do you think that you've umm you know taken from them? (20:14): picked up from them?interview: yeah.: okay, well [inspiring person 3]and the postdoc and undergrad advisors, really looking at problems very broadly and going in, go in for the throat trying to predict what you could see when. i would say one other big uhhh mentor was [inspiring person 4], i spent a sabbatical with him, and he had this very strange way of talking that took me 6 months to figure out. we didn’t differentiate between the future where you knew something was going to be done and the past, and so we'd talk about something and i'd go "well i didn't see that paper" and he'd go "oh it hasn't been done yet but it will be" so i always thought several steps ahead. and then sometimes he would fill in, if people weren't moving quickly enough he'd fill in missing technology, and that was about half of his lab. and he'd never talk about it, he gave 5 lectures at [university 1] when we first met, there was one instrument related slide on all of those and so i really like that strategy and point of view to try and adopt it to the extent that we can. uhh in our field there's less, uhhh instrument tool method developments, we maybe had to do a little more uhh than other people but that’s opened up new worlds to us, and so i, i like that ummm... i like that part of how he operated. i mean i'm always sociologically interested, so he had this molecular biotechnology department at [university 2] and i almost moved to that before he quit and everything. and their problem as opposed to uh [organization 1] here for instance is, they focused on one problem and it was his problem, so he couldn’t get, i think he brought this top computer scientist from [university 3]- [top scientist]- for a year, that guy won i think it was like national medal of science, something really significant in computer science and he had a big accomplishment, no recognition for that because it didn't forward you know the department mission, so he left and went back to [university 3]. so you couldn’t' get top tiered people with that strategy of everything is my problem. and so i like a little greater spread of where the problems come from, and then you know if we can contribute or if we can at least learn about them and enjoy them, we can find the right people to work on them and you know, send them on the way. that’s one of the advantages, that's one of the reasons i like [university 4] so much, is we are right around this court of science and it's pretty easy to grab people from the community as well when we need to uhh and that's rare... and i just enjoy spending my time doing that kind of thing, in addition to my own science. : there's a little bit of an underdog complex, which helps, so it's not you know for the most there are a couple people who have some issues –laughing- personal issues that prevent them from collaborating as they might to make themselves and their science better. uhh but that generally isn't the problem here, i think the scholarship across all fields is respected. there's a little less emphasis on money than other places, which is good and bad. i think people are a little too happy here so we don't get centers like we should, because somebody has to die to write that proposal, having had that experiences. uhh but that you know on the upside it's very easy to collaborate the, you know, the culture is students can go talk to other faculty, there are places like [organization 1] that draw people together from different departments together and schools and it's expected to encourage even if there aren't any resources to support it. that’s the downside- there are some places that you really get significant seed money if you have a good idea. here you are pretty much on your own, uhh i think that could be fixed, i mean that’s what we ought to be raising money for. : anyway : right, so i like this, right... i'm not that smart and i like everyone to bring ideas from where they came from and we argue over those. very much like what i learned i used to do over coffee and and uhhh wine, where you know each person says okay, what is it they think is important or when someone has an idea, what's important about it, what resources we need to do it, what we have to stop doing in order to make it happen, who's going to care what we are going to learn along the way, and so i choose people for my group who are motivated because i've learned i have no ability to motivate people who aren't uhh but then uhh they come in and sort of argue for their experiments or projects uhh and then some people join in or we say, "look so and so has been doing that for you know so much time and they're not learning something" or "this approach has been tried" or "here's the reason we think this may not work" and it's very flat in my groups. so it could be a high school student, could be a visiting professor making the argument and it doesn't matter if they have a good idea then they’ll lead the project and they’ll get other people engaged but through that. and then we take people from all kinds of different fields, chemistry, physics, bioengineering, math, pediatric oncology, film making, uhh you know wherever there is something interesting people can put that out. i'm a little worried, i have uhhh an m.d./ph.d student just finishing his residency today. he wants to make bone marrow from stem cells, and he's very charismatic and we have not so much in the way of resources for that project so when he comes to the lab tomorrow i'm afraid everyone's going to migrate over to that project. so you have to worry about balance a little bit in that sense and making sure you are able to do what you know what you're funded for research. we also write proposals based on what we find interesting and hope to sell that to agencies or foundations or someone, to you know to sell our ideas rather than just chasing money. works most of the time, right now it’s a little tough.  : blehh, so i used to have a good way because we are very heavily experimental, it used to be asking: "do you work on cars?" and, cause you know plumbing, everything you have to put all the parts back in, they all have to work together, you miss stuff, and there's a... digital goes to 0 and that’s pretty much where microscopes work only sometimes it takes a week to get to the low temperature stage to fix something and then another week to you know... heat it up or cool it down again, but i can't do that anymore. so i'm trying to find a new strategy or question, i don't have it yet. if you have any ideas i'd really appreciate it, but i depend on recommendation letters a lot, i look around a lot and i say who is the best person in your group or department, i'm going to work very hard to recruit them. and so i tend to get a lot of academic track peoples, very high intellectual level, and i use my students to tell me what they think of the people who come through as well.  : oh, i think they can ask questions, yeah, yeah. so one of the... when you... at some point people come to you because you have a name rather than they're interested in the work and i think my students can differentiate that better than i can. people that come through the group will be a little more honest about why they're thinking of joining and what they're excited about, and so they know to ask those kind of questions. and they’ve seen some people rise up very quickly in terms of productivity and become the go to people, it's very undemocratic, where people are producing data or ideas or manuscripts or whatever get a lot of attention and i tell them that from the start, but they're kind of looking for who might have that capability and it's never, you know you're never 100% with it, but you know a few people in the group who, who are that way and make a big difference. interview: uh huh right, right. so um actually brings us to one of the kind of themes that we've been investigating and trying to understand, and some of the tests you did try to get at this using our best guesses as to what are the cognitive assays of those traits. but one of them is the tendency to generate stuff. um it turns out, in most of the studies that have tried to figure out who is going to be a creative producer and how many creative products will they generate, the best predictor is the number of products they will generate. it's not just a stochastic phenomenon, it seems there's really something to getting stuff out, umm that seems to unclutter the brain. have you ever heard of the zeigarnik effect- so this is a crazy thing, there's this lady bluma zeigarnik, was a russian moved to germany and then studied um, but while she was doing her doctoral study, she was at a restaurant and noticed the waiters had very good memory for orders until they delivered the food. and after they delivered the food, they forget everything. so the idea is that you know there may be clogging up your brain, or like the undone work, the unexecuted work is perfect and it's only once you expose it to the light of day, that you're like oh i could've done that differently. (30:00): yeah it's funny you mention that 'cause one of the things that sort of got me mad during your... during that testing was a very bad memory, and i think that became clear when i got that list of words, and i could remember 5 or 6 different ones each time. but my managing editor for the journal, part of the job is you know we come up with new ideas that we can go forward. so i sort of throw them out and expect someone to catch them and carry them off and do something with them. so the person i just left behind uh, or moved over to another journal, uhh wasn't doing that and that was really my main complaint about them and i think the new person we got, who sort of came online right after that, i'm hopeful that she's much more, uhh much more that way. [inspiring person 4] was that way too, he'd just throw stuff over his shoulder and he had a whole cohort of people catching and running with things and then he'd just completely forget about them, which is fine- i'm happy with that, and if those get moved forward, then were good. and if i come back to them later somehow and then i realize they didn’t go anywhere then that's upsetting, so. anyway i was thinking about it while i was trying to remember those words in your, in that last visit, so yeah. : i was pretty bad (laughing) : and then i'll tell you a story i heard from the head of physics at ucsd.  : yeah, pick and sort, yeah. and that’s what we do in the group as well, so people come back with things, and yeah. chew on them, if someone doesn’t make it they'll go refine it uhh and come up with better arguments.interview: right, right, that’s a great observation. and i guess you know there is a decent you know, just from just the science of team science, having some people like that in any group.: well i think you can train it to some extent too. i had this guy, who was the least creative grad student who ever came in. in 2 years, he was the only one who passed all 5 entrance exams and he joined my group as his 5th choice, because he made some strategic errors in not realizing that professors could see the order he wrote down. he's just a very nice young guy from kentucky, he didn't know better. so all his ideas were the most boring things, you know if he did them and they came out better than anyone could imagine, not even he would want to read the papers. but what he did is he went around everybody in the group and he became the 2nd best at each technique we had. as the senior people left, he took over. so he became indispensable, he probably had 10 papers where he was somewhere between 2nd and 8th author. and then finally, we had uhh, someone sort of come say "you ever look at these", these particular cage molecules that they made in the soviet union and america during the cold war, and then he just took that and ran with that first. and he did in one paper what had been five papers of our uhh earlier work and wrote the sort of key thing that started that field, then he started getting undergrads working for him and he posed problems for them that they could get to work in 2 months. and they were simple but significant. and so the first one he had a paper in nano letters, top journal in our field, we thought we were going to get that guy back for grad school, he had never done research before and now he's at mit working with my undergraduate advisor actually is his last student. but uhh he just became, his last year in grad school, basically would've gotten him tenure anywhere with ideas he came up with. and it was just sort of just pushing and pushing saying yeah you can't do that, you can't do that, that’s not interesting, and then finally he sort of figured it out, and yeah independent now, and visited him about a week ago, apparently he's doing pretty well.  : yeah push, yeah. : ok, there we go (laughing), we'll bring him down yeah. he can give his talk.  : (laughing) now let me tell you what he wanted to do.  : so i think you can train that. i think when you're on all these advisory boards and everything else, people show you a very diverse ray of problems and you become good at solving problems like that. generally you come up with- they're not the same solutions, but you’ve seen enough different sides of different things that you can, uhh that you can make headway more quickly. and this guy whiteseye at harvard, he probably does 4 of those things a week somewhere in the world, and is just phenomenal at first identifying the problems and then in a very brutal way going after them and saying here are potential solutions. and so as, you know i started doing some of that in different areas, that’s one of the things i tried to bring to the students and colleagues, the theme based discussion idea, like chronic pain, right no one's made any progress in a decade and more people die of oxycotin overdoses and heroin now in the us and so forth, so we brought in the top guy in the field, the academic son and the founder whose brother was head of anesthesiology at [medical center 1]. academic brother, had him give his talk, people you know came up with ideas, he shot them all down as we expected, we sent him back to [city 1] then started a series of discussions over how you'd go after this problem, bringing people from pain management, anesthesiology, pet imaging, biochemistry, receptors, our chemical pattern and imaging group, and that group learned to speak each others languages and identify the problems and go after them. that sort of skills across all kinds of different problems, so we did conductive airplane windows, then have this microbiome work laying out you know, here are the challenges, who has ideas? and some people are really drawn to that and curious and they develop those skills to say here's how we might approach that problem or i don’t have any ideas for this one ill come back to the next one. and so you get this growing group of people who have some of the experiences of, you know the advisory board and other stuff where you're exposed to a lot of different issues across different fields. : yes, uh huh. absolutely, yeah i'm writing something up for [journal 1] on that actually.  : well i think communication is a big part of it. in one of the successes of our field nanoscience is that we had to teach each other languages. uhh and so you, you know, and i taught, as an example, i cotaught with 6 others this biologically inspired computation class at [university 1] and so genetic algorithm right? all these different things mean different things to different parts of the class and all the professors would go to every lecture we could just 'cause those kind of discussions were interesting. so part of it was getting rid of you know what's your definition within the field and how do other people approach these ideas, (inaudible, 38:54-38:55) what are pheromones, what are, how do you hear all these parts, hopefully trigger something more or at least draw people into the, into the field whether it's neuroscience or computer science or measurements that those, you know very smart skills.  : we just you know, there was, whoever we had to cover them in that class and then the students would do projects where they would do something that we hadn't covered. but it was 3 years we ran it. uhh it collapsed when we left unfortunately. but over 3 years, we had it you know, we got some interesting coverage of different topics. : yeah., i'll tell you the story later of that. but yeah things will come back, i remember science and not big peoples names. and to the point where someone will tell me about what they do and then i'll tell them about some experiment and they'll get this confused look and say yeah i did that. or the worst one probably was someone telling me about an experiment and i said "oh is that published" and they said "yeah" and then we looked it up and sure enough, that had come out of my lab. : it is, yeah its, yeah. but i'm used to that kind of embarrassment. so i can pull things almost randomly uhhh but not necessarily recall what i need. like anne often wants me to tell her a story as we are going to bed, and i need some priming, give me just something to start and ummm just like random number generator, you put it in add it all up and you print something out, and i think it uhh works that way often in uhh in those discussions as well. and you also get to see a lot of science, so i thought my thesis advisor was brilliant because he knew what everyone did in the field. and then once i started travelling around and going to meetings and realizing you know, i'm seeing these people give the same talks over and over, you'd have to be an idiot not to know what everyone did, he could probably give all their talks just because he had heard them so much. so, there's some repetition, i mean there are not so many things you only hear once, put it that way, in our field, and then because i see people submit their papers and so forth that reinforces a lot of that. : right, and how to find it again, that’s the other, you know when you need to that can be... luckily there are some tools now available, and i take all my notes on a computer just so i can search them. i don't ever uhhh use paper. : all very interesting to me. yeah, i'm very visual, that’s part of the reason why my thesis, my phd thesis was such a disaster, it was, you know you take data for months, then spend months analyzing, then you get a finger print then you're done. whereas this microscopy, the images are spectacularly beautiful and you can pull a lot out and you can merge different modalities together in interesting ways. so that i find extremely attractive, and then the idea of you know what we are doing with the mathematicians now and how to pull apart what the key features of images are, without some prior assumptions and so forth, that’s been just fantastic for us.  : right, i think i'm relatively uninhibited. i think it's important for people not to be afraid of looking stupid. so i ask questions about things and just say when i'm ignorant and wanna learn. you know i've had some significant embarrassments along those lines when i was in a group meeting at the [university 2]. there were two other faculty that i worked with pretty closely, they were talking about pcr, and then i had this great idea of using extremophile enzymes to uhh you know to do that, and they just were staring at me and then a colleague there said, that's not only a great idea, it's already a nobel prize (laughing). i just was ignorant enough, but you know that's fair enough, so i think my own take on all that is, you just can't be afraid of saying what you don't know. no one is going to know everything. and if you again going back to pitching ideas and getting the feedback you need, then that's important. i also like taking, once you lay everything out, having priorities. so for instance this microbiodental stuff, you know we have a list of the prioritized organisms and chemicals, and then we are going to overlay that with "ok" what's possible to do. and then we'll just knock 'em off and go down the list and as we, you know, figure out how to work together and garner resources, we'll add more and more. and so there's a strategy also once you identify problems and start coming up with solutions, uhh that that i think gets you to the, you know, gets you somewhere faster. and even if it isn't where you originally intended, that's okay...  : yeah. : you can't be afraid of laying everything out at the start and then saying okay this is possible, that one we are going to have to put off, and i would say we did that with measurements in the brain and then that carried over into you know a number of other areas once people saw what we could do.  : oh yeah, no i think that stimulation chaos is probably to me the most important. : no : is this recent?  : oh yeah yeah send me, there's actually a new center in [country 2] i'm on the board of on origins of life. : right, well i feel like it's part of that trigger, right, when you're looking for what's going to generate something, you know, looking at different fields, how they do things or, what other people see as big problems, or just sometimes some random little bit uhhhh in a talk or in a discussion will set things off. or even bring back a memory, you know i went to work on this other bit. and sometimes multiple tracks like feel like "okay i can be paying attention to this talk and thinking about this other bit" and uhh sometimes those cross over in uhh in interesting ways.  : right, right. : yeah, i think, not so many people push for that, surprisingly.   : that's correct, yeah. : yeah and things that, i wanted to work with people that i enjoy, it turns out to be another overlay on that... : ...but usually they have a similar outlook or at least excited to work on that particular problem. : oh good yeah please! (laughing) : perfect. well actually we try not to have people who do what we already do, we want people who bring in something new. uhh because we figure we do most of those things better than other groups so we don’t want someone already trained, but someone who brings a new topic in.. : okay! yeah there we go. : oh really, very good. it's very useful. : uh...i don't know?  : -laugh- i don't know, getting my phd. : hard work. : um, i don't know, probably coming from a rural background, not a very rich background. : i went to school. : i grew up on a farm and have always been interested in animals, so it was science driven. : well, i was interested in animal breeding and advancing milk production and taking care of the animals. : i just liked it, i don't know. i then went to vet school and then –inaudible (1:42)-  : working in the lab. i work in a lab - i'm trying to make zebrafish models for human disease. : also, i - i'm involved with patients with mitochondrial diseases. : yeah, yeah it's all related to my research. : um there's patients with mitochondrial diseases and then we try to model them in the zebrafish. : uh, work hard? : yeah i mean - and then you have to have a passion for it, if you don't then it's hard to succeed. : i'm probably more cynical. : well it's harder to get - it's harder to get funding and things like that now, right? : write more grants. : just keep doing it, i mean i'm a rat on the wheel. : uh, i think all of those are important. : i think it's on an individual basis.  : i think it's also individual. : i, i don't know.  : it's too complicated of a question. : it depends upon what your personal values are. : i think if it's like things that are - things that you do to be a person, yeah that's important in your work also, but do you have a belief about certain things about religion and things like that, i don't think that should be in the workplace i guess. : oh, cause there's a lot of terminal diseases that aren't – that aren't being cured right now. : well and then just understanding it, cause it's complicated understanding how mitochondria is made. it's a really interesting question. : i enjoy doing it. : no, i mean i think it just developed over time, but i was always interested in metabolism and mitochondria. : it was an endosymbi - it was a bacteria and then there was endosymbiosis and there was an integration into the cell and how did that occur? : yeah, it's a fundamental event that allowed us to develop and a lot of eukaryotes to develop and so, you know, how does it develop and then how does the - how is it in one like a yeast cell different then a human. and then in a human, mitochondria in a neuron is way different than a mitochondria in a heart or skeletal muscle\ : \and so, you know, how - and particularly in neurons, it suggested that bad mitochondria lead to neurodegeneration. so, it's like well how do you get rid of bad mitochondria, you know, why mitochondria in neurons, and why does parkinson's wait to present itself when you're really old... when you have the same mitochondria and the same pathways in other cells. you know, why is a neuron that late and why is it supposed to, you know, why not the heart early in life, those kinds of questions. : when i was, um, in vet school. : in vet school. : -inaudible, ~7:23- : there's a lot of questions to answer that we still haven't answered. : no\ : \because it's an - it's an - it's an evolving field. how i started my - my first started, i'm doing things completely different now than i was when i first started and i - my research has evolved to ask new questions and you start to learn about something you have more questions to answer. : yeah, but it's hard to put it on just one person, i think it's uh\ : well you see people at meetings or you have conversations with people, you have colleagues. : about our research -laugh-\ : \or life. : i mean i've had – i've had mentors that are older than me that have become friends, but then again, cohorts that started out at the same time at other labs and as you get older with them, you become friends and colleagues, you know. you become, you know, whereas, you know, where we started out in graduate school or post-docs, we were enemies and now we're friends\ : \you learn about them, they talk about their research, talk about their personal life. : you know, a lot of things. it's somebody to bounce ideas off of and things like that. : well, they'll make time to talk to you and they'll be interactive. : supportive. : yeah, i have a lot of grad students and undergrads in my lab and i help a lot of undergrads at [university], i teach. : because, um, because of their future. : that it's important to do research or whatever your passion is and hopefully in science cause that’s the ones that i see.  : well you say it, you lead by doing. um, like i go teach second graders at my friend's elementary school every year.\ : \like i go over, sometimes they come. : umm...\ : \um i think - well usually what i like to do in my lab is get em young, get them in their freshmen or sophomore year and, yeah you can usually assess a lot of times because in order for them to stay in our lab for that long, they have to engage. so the ones that aren't fall off quickly and the ones that are stay in the lab and then... you know, continue somewhere else in science, so.  : yeah, the first year, yeah. : you know it's - when they start in the lab, you tell them what you expect, and if they aren't gonna be able to do that, then you just tell them that maybe they should do something else. : you know, you don't - you sort of let them self-select. : well, i think - yeah it's hard for women. women drop out easily. : cause you have to have - you have a family. : it's not easy to do what i do. i don't have a family. a lot of my colleagues don't have families,\ : \but you have very supportive spouses.  : well, i think also for women it's harder, you know, look at hilary clinton right? i mean there's - we all have stories that there's a glass ceiling, we're trying to break it, and if you go look at the uh - if you go and look at the national academy of sciences, there's still more men there than women and - it's you know, it's an all-boys network. : a lot of times inappropriately, yeah. : unfortunately. : yeah the men. : men. : yeah. : well sometimes some of the – sometimes some of the – some of the women we know also aren't that supportive of other women because they feel like they have such a hard time that they're bitter, i don't know. : i'm not a good example because i don't have a family and i work all the time. : so there can't be any balance...\

interviewer: -laughs-

: \you have to find a balance but, you know, i'm not probably a good person to recommend a balance. : uh well - well i was raised - i was raised that i was supposed to go to college when i was eighteen i was on my own, so - i was on my own. : yeah. : and that was all i knew and i knew i needed to get out of where i was living in a rural town because it wasn't - it's not a good place to have a future. : well some of the other people were going, but you know, i was fortunate. i knew what i wanted to do from a young age and that's what i did. you know i went to college and i knew i was gonna be - thought i was gonna be a vet and i didn't end up being a vet, i ended up getting a phd, but i knew i was gonna go to college. : um, i was in my undergrad - um i was... it was becoming clear to me that i was more interested in research.    : and then as i got into vet school, first year i realized that a dvm would not be useful for what i wanted to do and i didn't want to go back. i wanted to be a - originally i was gonna be a large animal vet in wisconsin. i didn't want to go back to wisconsin – rural wisconsin to be a vet, so i just, you know, cut my losses at that point, not necessarily, but you know i just jumped into what i wanted to do and said, you know, this is where i want to go, so. : working. : yes -laughs- i was a child labor. : but when you grow up with that environment, you don't know any different, but. you know, i knew i didn't want to do it for the rest of my life because - and not that i didn't like it, it's just - you know it's – it's just a - you milk cows twice a day every day, it's a hard lifestyle, and the family farm has kinda gone away now.  : i don't have one. : no, i don't have a spouse. i don't have any children either. : well yeah, i mean i do - i have hobbies and i have friends.  : so, i used to bike race. : i'm a bike official, so i have activities.\ : \but i don't have a thing where like a house, where i have to, you know - i don't have a family where i have to do things, you know, my time is kinda what i want to do. : well it used to because i would train a lot yeah. : sure.  : biking is very good for that, yes.  : no, i get em - i guess i get em a lot when i talk, look at researchers, work with my students, when i inject the zebrafish with my undergrads.
 : um yeah, a brother and a sister. : um... hm, i guess my sister maybe?  : no, she's a med tech. she's got a biochemistry degree and she's a med tech. : um i guess they've built up based on my research.  : some of it has come from um having people in the lab, to push new  ideas. : well i guess i have people - i have people working on the project. : whatever's going on - i mean it's not - there's not one particular event, it's like - it's a process. : yeah there's multiple projects in the lab, yeah. and there's collaborations with other faculty members, you know it's not just one problem. overall there's one question, but it's got many forms. : no. : yeah so many projects, yeah. : well they complement, but it's also difficult, i mean, look at a lot of different things. unfortunately, i have to do a lot of things. : it's a combination of the two. i think you have to have intuition, but you also have to be rational at some point. there's times when you drop things or work forward. : well sometimes, for example, it might start as a collaboration. we had a neurologist that had some uh - someone died - they found out the gene and it was a mitochondrial protein and so they approached us to get help, and it's developed into a couple big projects in the lab. : well at that point, we put a student – a post-doc in the lab was working on with their post-doc and they start this - a sequential set of experiments that we do all the time to, you know, find out what it did and that's how it kind of grew.  : yeah, there is a - there is a – there is, yes - a process and a template. : um well it depends on the results, yeah. i mean how would things go next. : uh yeah, definitely models, outlines, yes.  : no, just hand-drawn. : just thinking models. : a lot, cause a good model is always wrong and you'd modify it as you go. : it depends. we try to publish it as soon as we can but we have to have a story.  : team. : usually i'm a leading role. : well, you know, in a lab setting, you have people that you're training and so you're training them to think and then you train them to do experiments so you work together to accomplish the goal.  : but usually because i know more than they do, i'm the leader because i have the years of experience they lack. : of course, yes.  : no. just the same old thing everyday. : uh, read - read the literature. : the published literature. : yeah, every day. i am looking right now at zebrafish crispr. : uh, i think that's a too complicated answer\ : \some of if is a gut, right\ : \if it's a gut - if my students start doing the right experiments right, you know it's trying to motivate them, it's using your gut. whereas other times, where it's time to, you know, the model that you thought was right isn't right, then you'd cut your losses and move on. : well i wouldn't say barren, but you know, there's always ebbs and flows, yes. : well i lot of time i'm teaching undergrads\ : \so i have other things that just take me away, you know.   : i would say most of the day i'm doing my science. : yeah. : i don't know, maybe about 5 or 6 hours. it depends. : yeah, sometimes. like sometimes i stay up 'til really late to get papers in if i have grants. sometimes i stay up all night to get grants done.\ . \i don't like to do it but, you know, the other problem is, a lot of the time during the day, i spend all my time talking to everybody and finally at night i get a chance to do what i need to do. : … can you say it again? : \sorry. : well, i guess\ : \but yeah, part of it, but you know sometimes, like you say produce a product, that the product is very abstract in my work, right?  : it could be a paper, it could be a grant. so\ : \i would say yes, but um... but i guess just because the work flow is just kind of, you know it's... it's, you know, could be something where you got a mutant. if you've got the mutant you could move forward on that. if you can't get the mutant, you can't, right?interviwer: uh huh.

: sometimes never getting the product is also – makes you as successful as getting a product. : well there's times when you try to – you know you try to make out a certain animal model or something and it's lethal and you can't make it because, you know, it's not gonna survive. sometimes you learn a lot about it because you can't even actually make your model. you realize that\ : \you know there's a lot going on that you don't understand; it's not as simple as you thought. : … yeah we’re quant- yeah, you know, there's different ways to quantitate. i have to teach one class a year of undergrad. um, papers, you try to get as many papers out as you can, but you know, where you publish them, and the extent to them. graduating students is another way that you can quantitate productivity.  : getting grants is another way. : well of course, yeah, i think sometimes i produce less because some other people have way more money because of where they are, you know what i mean?  : so... but i produce more than other people because of where they are versus where i am.  : well i think i'm in the upper end, but if i was like one of my colleagues that had howard hughes money and had a million dollars a year and i didn't have to write grants for it, i could be more productive.  : yeah, we spend\ : \we spend – we spend a lot of our time chasing grants. you know, getting grants or doing grants, trying to get money, and you know things like salaries where everybody's gone up, but our grant dollars haven't gone up so... you know, i would say the thing that most faculties spend their time doing is trying to get grant money.  : well, i don't think we have time to spend on - more time on work because we spend more time on writing grants.  : well...yeah because i want to have a big lab, so. : i have ten right now. : and post-docs.  : i guess, at some point you gotta just publish them and you could always revise, i mean... : you're never done. : when it’s accepted for publication or when it’s funded. interviewier (32:00): i see. so another one of our themes is working memory. so creativity is sometimes seen as the ability to join together ideas that have not been brought together before. um and so in order to have - to bring those ideas together, one must be able to hold them in mind long enough to make those disparate connections. does that kind of sound right to you in terms of creativity, like the need to be able to join together ideas that are kind of unique from each other?: i guess, yeah. i guess. : remember em? i think these are really abstract questions. : -laugh- : yeah. : well i think - i think it has to be to succeed because i have all my notebooks from when i was a postdoc, and i go back and look and i know all the experiments i did. : you have to have certain memory over time and i usually remember better than my students. : … uh, i guess, because of how my training is compared to other people, but they might see things better or differently than me. : well, training too though, so, you know there's different ways to look at problems right?  : and then you can follow a reductionist approach and break it down into something or you can, you know, find a model to understand it. : probably both. : sure. : well, try to find a – find a force myself to work sometimes on something to complete it\ : \don't multitask.  : sometimes. : i guess i probably balance between them. : well try new things in your research, perhaps going in new directions\ : \not being afraid to try something new. : it's pretty normal for me. : uh, it's probably the way i am. : yeah, i would say. yeah because if i stayed in the same thing, i wouldn't – wouldn't survive. you know i think you have to – you have to adapt and move, because of the whole way you - the way we do science, for example, has moved and adapted to technology improves. the way you can ask questions change. you know new tools become available that weren't available twenty years ago. : … i guess. : i don't know. : … sometimes. : well outside of the work too. : … mm hm, on some things. : … i don't know if these questions help you. : these answers. : … no, i don't have adhd. : well when i first started i worked at the lab bench, so i could work all day at the lab bench. but you know now i'm in a desk, i have more leadership role so that changes - i have to multitask more. : … hm, i - i don't – i don't – i don't know. i think i've always been passionate about it, i don't think so. : it's always been intense. if it didn't, i wouldn’t be here.  : no, it's natural. : yeah. no i've always been this way. : i was probably unique in that. : i don't know. : well i know, but i'm not gonna answer it. : um, not really.  : … i - i don't know. i think it's mainly about - like my creativity and all that is something that you have to be passionate about, and i guess that’s - i've always been passionate about it, so. : yeah. : no i think you got it all. i hope it's coherent but\ : the questions sound so abstract to me that it's hard to understand how you can make – make something – how you can get something out, you know what i mean? : it's not - it's much different than what i do.  : so. : okay.

interviewer: \and sharing with me your thoughts on all this and um, if you do find that there was something that you know we missed that you're like, "oh my gosh, like why didn't i tell her this" or whatever, please feel free to ping me um and i'll be happy to talk more. and if you any questions about the project let me know too, and we can be in touch. : okay. : wow : i should know him! : i should know him just because we do some research on the long-term effects of offspring exposure to ssri, from their mothers, and we actually had a paper recently that showed at least in mice the exposure through s citalopram but not through fluoxatine. the teen appeared to have long term effects on serotonin transmission, and seems to reduce adult anxiety related behavior. so now we are trying to get a study funded maybe ssris may actually confer resilience to stress in offspring could be wonderful because we know the risks to offspring who are born to mothers with depression and anxiety disorders. : you know i actually need to get involved in that i have not been for some reason : okay : super : um hm  : hmm. yeah that's a good question.  i think there are couple of answers. but i was just writing to a high school student who was interviewing me by email – i have to say, probably the thing that i am the most proud is kind of my path to meld chemistry and physical sciences with psychiatry and neurosciences and really having starting that early in my career when it was not popular. multidisciplinary research wasn’t the hot thing that it is today. i had to fight a lot of uphill battles because i didn't fit into one camp easily or the other. and so one of our successes is using a different method of trying to measure neurotransmission in brain, and i study serotonin specifically. and to be able to you really start to impart with the power that they need to, to investigate neurotransmission where you can see it with the coding. so i think one of the earliest success that we had is probably one of the techniques that is the most widely practiced in neurochemistry is in vivo micro-dialysis. so we had made a transporter dialysis mouse model when i was a post doc and i wanted to go ahead then and look at how the reduced loss of the transporter impacted extracellular serotonin levels even though there seemed to be obvious answers to this question. so we couldn't know, and we couldn't say, so i embarked on this quest to see in vivo micro-dialysis in behavior of mouse which people said couldn't be done particularly for serotonin. and i did make it work, probably because i was a chemist by training and had a lot of experience with that kind of instrumentation the methods of making it work, that's how my career started and um so i was able to make it work and since then there have been some integral people who have been able to continue to take this and really push it to its limits.  : i think it's kind of stems from a couple of things. the first is really almost a stubbornness – when people say that something that can’t be done – if i think it can be done and that almost make it want to i want to push it so i try even harder. i was always that way- my mother says since i was a little kind i think also i love technological challenges – i love kind of the intricacies of trying to figure out where sticking points are and finding ways around them. i love to make measurements, and that's what i have always been fascinated as a scientist. and when you put those challenges together i got introduced to thinking about the brain, really i was telling [research assistant] about this. i took a left turn in my early career and ended up nih at a laboratory of neuropharmacology and got interested in the brain. so those things kind of coalesced! and/ : /um so i have been working in the industry as a chemist right out of undergrad. and i think that stubbornness really came to play where i loved my job, it was about developing analytical methodology to toxicology studies. i loved the work, i loved challenge the trivia of all these different compounds and how to analyze these in different low levels. but i also have these immediate supervisors you know who i just really didn't think were very smart. they were much older than me, so they were used to bossing people around. always wanted to tell me how to do my work. and i felt like my ideas were much better. that made me want to go back to school to get a graduate degree, because i figured the only way i was going to control what i did in life was to go back to school. but i really didn’t know anything about you know graduate degrees. no one in my family had one i didn’t know anything about so i decided to get my masters degree, and in the meantime i decided to quit my professional job and try to take a job in basic research- and i had a colleague who left the company i worked at and was at the nih he knew of this one year temporary position doing receptor binding. i didn't know what receptors were, i mean, i didn't know how to analyze them, etc. but i took the job! and i remember it was kind of a scary thing, i didn't have any benefits, i was just newly married, so my husband had hoped benefits and i said i'm going to do this i don't know where it'll take me and i ended up loving it so much that i stayed for 10 years. i did my research there, i had a post doc and did fellowship there and that's really why i started to meld the brain and learning about the brain and psychiatry and serotonin, which was my boss's subject of his research with my own love of bioanalytical chemistry and instrumentation so : i think there was a number of people in my life, i have been very lucky in that regards. i went to an excellent public high school in [city], and had a 7th grade school - ['s teacher] who really encouraged me – told my mom that i was a natural scientist. we didn't have any scientists in my family, so that was kind of a surprise to my mom.  :  she did! : it felt great!! i liked what i was doing, i liked science classes!  then in high school – i had two excellent chemistry teachers – ['s teacher], who unfortunately committed suicide, and this other teacher who i had organic chemistry from. that's kind of where i knew i liked chemistry.  and it was this subject that people didn't like. everyone complained about chemistry but to me, they said "oh, you have to memorize stuff." but i remember even from the beginning, thinking, - you don’t have to memorize this you just have to imagine yourself as a molecule. if you can imagine yourself as a molecule, for example, an amine group, or a hydroxyl group, then you kind of know what those things would do. so then it made intuitive sense to me.  : it's kind of like …. it’s more like a personality. i know now. people are intuitive to me too. for instance people who are insecure, you can kind of predict how they may react to a certain situation in a certain way right. molecules are kind of the same way. once you understand the arrangement of the atoms, especially in organic chemistry when there are these things called functional groups, then it's not hard to predict what their reactions would be, how they would react with other molecules, how they would behave when you try to separate them for instance. so that kind of i don't really think of it as a visualization in a strict sense, of like, vision, but it's more like an intuitiveness about their behavior – not exactly like a vision.  : oh absolutely! : absolutely! : exactly!! : yes exactly! so it feels intuitive to me! : no! haha i haven't but that's how i teach chemistry... my first faculty position was in the chemistry department is at [university]. and i did a lot of chemistry teaching students over those years, trying to teach them how to think about how to think about the concept of chemistry, not as something you just have to memorize, because then you would just it's really difficult. but then if you try to really get underneath those and understand the concepts, try to gain that intuition, then you don't need to memorize those things. : mhmm : it can, it certainly can! : people who influenced me a lot? : well i think really what influenced me to want to get a phd was a woman named ['s influencer], and she was the head of the chemistry department at [university] where i started back for this master's degree and she sought me out i think at some point shortly after i've taken a couple of courses, and said, "you know, you really gotta think about getting a phd!" that wasn't even on my radar screen. and she said you are better than just getting a master's degree, you should do this! and i was really lucky, that she reached out to me and she helped me get a fellowship from the us department of education, to pay for school and you know kind of gave me that, she allowed me to see possibilities, and you know helped me out to kind of have confidence to do that. and then of course, you know a guy that i worked with, we just published our last paper together just a couple of years ago. so we really worked together for 25 years, doing the same stuff, his name is ['s mentor and colleague]. and he really imparted the love the current science that i do. he had been an undergraduate chemistry major, and he had always liked chemistry. so he thought it would be cool if we worked together and so he always got me to think in ways that got me think about things in ways i hadn't been thinking about them and i really liked that relationship. : well you know he was a psychiatrist and had a deep understanding of many years of studying people. so you know he kind of taught me to think about extending what i was doing beyond maybe the minutia i had been focusing on the problems in psychiatry i think the other thing was he had a great ability to see the ambiguities in our science. and you know whereas people want to oversimplify things right you discover something. at the same time we made the knockout mouse model he discovered 5httlpr which is the most famous gene variant in psychiatry and we've spent years now fighting against the oversimplification. he's always had ability to kind of embrace ambiguity and the complexities and always helped me to kind of think of beyond you know these more simple explanations of how biological systems maybe function particularly people : that's one of the things that i enjoy the most about my job. so i mean there are certainly times in this funding climate where i think jeez i'd really love to be in a research institute to do some research but that’s not really true i think the things that are most exciting to me are watching young scientists blossom. so i've trained over 20 people get their phds and over 80 undergraduates have worked with me over the years. so i really like to follow them and keep in touch with them such as on facebook, or other ways. i like to try to teach them about science as well, not how to do an experiment, but how to be scientists. interviewer (15:34): so what do you teach them? what do you tell them?: oh gosh all kinds of things. one of the things that i have been working on the most recently was trying to work with them to think about how to design studies. i mean it's kind of easy to just do an experiment, and let results of the experiment lead you to the next one. but a lot of things we do in the lab take more time to experiment, you know they can take years to experiment and so i've been trying to pull back a little bit now, and think about, how do know where this is going in this time frame and what can we actually think about designing studies in a way that make them a more powerful start, and is that something that i can do. and i believe i can. i try to do thought experiments with them, i tell them the cheapest science that we do just sitting here at the desk and we can do as many experiments as we want for free basically by just sitting here and talking about it!   i try to get them to think about all the different possibilities, all the different outcomes of a particular experiment, not just the ones that you want to happen, think will happen. and then we've been trying to think about well, okay, what if we don't get the expected answer? the one we want? then what will that answer tell us that maybe nonpreferred answer and how will we design our next study. yes i think it's been off for the whole time : oh no that was the best stuff i had for you! :  yes so anyway it's a process wherein i am teaching myself while i am teaching them. and i think it works, and that makes us better scientists! : yeah it is an intuitive, purposeful process. maybe for some people they had it in the beginning...  i don't really think so. i still feel like there are scientists being like, "oh, it'd be interesting to do this, or it'd be interesting to do that" but i don’t know really lately it's something i'm trying to teach myself to do in an explicit way maybe because i know i now have a sense i'm kind of at a midway point in my career and i don’t have all the time in the world and there's something i really want to do. so how i can help us to focus on these goals? some people just do science i think because they you know for the sheer joy of discovery. i think that’s a great way to do science but that’s not really how i do science and not really what interests me about science  : yeah, i wanna solve a problem. i wanna do something that will have a lasting impact. not just by accident. although i think accidental discoveries and of course we know, accidental discoveries are very powerful in science but for me it's much more interesting to get into the nitty-gritty of a problem. to figure out, again, where the sticking points are. you know like why was it that we aren't able to make progress on you know like particularly in the area that i work in you know we have these drugs are used to treat patients tons of people are on ssri's but we don’t know how they work? we don't know why do ssri’s work in some and not in others? we can't design new drugs because we don't know what to design them for! it becomes this cyclic argument, trying to get out of that box. : yeah so i'm just telling [research assistant] that i think. it took me first half of career to formulate my specific hypothesis. we spent a lot of time doing tool development, and i think we have a lot of the tools or will have in the next couple of years that we didn't have couple years ago. so what i want to do with the second half of my career is figure out how serotonin transmission encodes information about the environment that’s important for organisms to make decisions about emotional ambiguous situations with the in context of depression, anxiety, and personality traits having to do with neuroticism. we know that people who are more neurotic, not neurotic, score higher on measures of neuroticism we know that tendency is predisposing to developing anxiety and depression and up until now, people have thought about serotonin transmission as soupy modulator right that’s what we call it as a neuro modulator. and there's all kinds of data that people use to invoke this idea about serotonin. but i have come to conclusion as we've been able to improve our ability to improve our ability to measure of serotonin in intact brains of behaving animals, and now through blood cells in people, every time we make a better measurement we learn more about the information that this transmitter encodes. so my idea is that it actually encodes information in a fast time frame. it’s not just something that is sitting around for days or months, you know floating around like a soup you know resetting set points of other systems. i think that these neurons are actually working to encode or to coordinate information between brain regions and so to test that hypothesis we need the tools to be able to ask those question. we have some of the tools we'll have some of the ones i believe strongly we have a project to make next generation sensors that are going to be vastly better than what we have. that project is now in the lab last year gone from science fiction i think to really scientifically doable.  so i think we're going to be able to ask those questions and that's what i want to gonna do.  : yeah, or more specificity i would say yeah. so you know i think we use things like questions as why do ssri's work as a context for maybe asking these more basic questions you know which is really why do ssri's work on certain people? how are they changing serotonin transmissions such that it improves people's abilities to deal with stress-producing situations? or alters the way they perceive their environment? : hahaha : i wish, is the short answer to that question. i wish every mentor would love to have some a metric that at the beginning will tell them whether a student will not just make it but be really good. i don't think anyone has one. i don’t think any mentor who has one and means it i would say experience was enabled me to tell sooner rather than later you know what's going to happen with a student. i think experience allows me to tell sooner rather than later to what’s going to happen what's gonna happen to the student. i think it's starting to give me the confidence maybe to let students go that i don’t think are gonna make it with me....  because some students can go on to work with someone else their environment you know fits them better, i think it doesn’t take too long maybe one year or so, to see how a student you know how they think. once you kind of sort that out, and you can see that they have good ideas that they themselves are creative and that they can embrace complexity, all things i thought were important, kind of in my own training. um embrace complex you know concepts. then i think it’s a matter of determining whether they have the drive and the persistence. because those are important in science as you know intelligence and even creativity i think. i've known a number of people who have been highly creative but they don’t have that internal persistence to make it through all the failure that you have to get through. and so it's that combination of those personality traits that i think makes people successful.  it's you know not a one size fits all combination. but people have to have some kind general strengths,  :  -laughs- :  right right and and you know, while there is another name for that, and that's – perfectionism –  and i think that's one of the toughest things maybes been the toughest for me to balance in my own life.  um because i think people who are highly successful have a certain degree of that perfectionism right. i was giving an example of a talk at [university] in chemistry recently and i used at the end of my talk an example of michael jackson – i'd seen a movie on him recently about his early years. and it was interesting, there was a woman interviewed in the move and she was her title, her job title was cultural curator and she talked about, about michael jackson and the fact that he was a perfectionist. everything he did he had to do till his legs fell off. and yet, you know when he'd go out and perform, people would just think it was his talent, especially for african americans, they think oh of course they're talented dancers and these stereotypes, right. but you know, yes he had the talent, but it was the fact that he had some vision of how something was to be, and wasn’t willing to give up on it until he got it to the way that he wanted it and i think that – that kind of combination – and yet you know as scientists we also have to know how to give something up. like perfectionism can also become a cage. right.so that balance that's i find, the most difficult. when do you know when to throw in the towel in something and go in a different direction and that's going to be more fruitful? when do you persevere with something because it just needs you to put some more effort into it? : till it's right! : it can totally vary : yeah totally it does! i make my students track them,\ : \i have a whole system. and it totally depends on where we start! : i have a student in my lab now who wrote a book chapter with only 4 revisions. that was the lowest number by far that i've done.now this was a book chapter on work we've already published but i've had other students where i've gone 50 rounds. 50 yeah. that’s probably like the most. and that’s okay. -laughs- if that’s how many it takes.  and for me, the part i really love is you know, when you start working, you  know sometimes the draft is really crappy that they give you, and it's really hard for me to get myself to look at it and... i get caught up in all the minutia with all the grammar and all the crap that i have to you know. for me, that i have to fix before i can even read it, get it into my head. and then like you're kind going up with mountain right and you know you're going back and forth you're starting to gain momentum, getting better and better. and all of a sudden it reaches this place where you just know as long as you don't get interrupted over the next few days or weeks, you're going to fall down to the other side and at the bottom will be be the finished product. and i love it when we reach that apex. when you can just feel okay the momentum is now going to carry us through to the end of this : um hm  : umm not from that point. umm i would say what my experience has been, and probably another thing what i really struggled with in my own career is going back and then revising. so you send things out, and you've reach momentous- that place of momentum you've now brought closure on, let's say a document or proposal, even a manuscript. so you sent it out and gets reviewed and comes back, and you have all this stuff that you have to deal with that its not interesting. you know its kind of- you're done with it. your brain is done with it-my- i'm done with it all the creative process is over for me. and you know now you have to go in and fix or change things and often it-the comments are not things that i find particularly interesting.  : so that's tedious. :  so those things... oh yeah i have drawers of those things -laughs-  i tell my group we didn't do another experiment in the lab we could keep going for 10 years just completing the things that we have.-laughs- : mhm : mhm : i understand what you are saying. i think from a more simple conception, our idea of working memory are kind of how many things you can put in your head at the same time. but for me i guess i think about it more in the concept more of what you're- i didn’t actually know the name of the author (camera beeping) who came up with this concept of flow and for me you know i talked about that momentum, in terms of drafts of a manuscript. but there's also this occurs when i'm working on something where i think you get this kind of expanded consciousness and so for me i often have to persevere through a period of time let's say a day. let's say i need to write something and it has to be de novo. it's got to convey some complex concept.    well i might have to think, i have to work for all day to get to this time, for me which is typically around 4:00 in afternoon where i all of a sudden start to feel kind of this expanded consciousness, and i begin to feel this flow. and so it can't really be- i don’t get there just by sitting and doing something else. i never can get there by being in office and having you know people interrupting me with all the mundane tasks of the day. but it may involve for me reading papers about you know the topic i need to write about. or you know doing some other work that's associated with the task at hand, informing myself. and then its almost like- that information is percolating, its you know its kind of cooking in your head of its own accord during this process until all of a sudden you feel like oh yeah its kind of all there now, comes out.um... i wish i had more control over that process, i wish it was something i could invoke at will. but i- for me i can't. i've not been able to find a way to do it yet....and you know some people say like oh like- my husband works with the tv on... other distractions, music, the radio... i have to have silence. no speaking to me you know.  and now that i know myself better, when i need to do that kind of what i call my really creative work and that involves for me thinking about complex concepts coming up with new ideas or trying to take ideas that i have somewhere in my head i kind of know they're there but they're not fully formed or tangible. putting them on a piece of paper in a way that other people can understandso then i feel my working memory is expansive. that process... it’s a process to get there. : that sounds like the process i was trying to describe because the focusing part is the part you're doing in all those hours, the read to the expansion right it's like you know, i don't know, it's like a gas expansion expanding almost. that’s kind of what it feels like in my head but you're like it doesn’t come without the focus. in other words, i can't really be you know working on some other tasks that are unrelated because then the focus never comes so yeah. mhm  : mhm :  (multiple mhm all throughout interviewer 2 talking) : -laughs- : a hungarian? : yes it's not russian. i don't think its russian : i think that, yeah i want to say romania or hungarian : you google it! : yes and i think the concept has to do something with what you enjoy, what one person enjoys another person doesn’t so : yeah! : mhm : that word is familiar but i don’t know :  frees your brain up : maybe that's why i don't like to revise things then –laughs- because to me it's done! the work products done its out of my head!  : then it's not : yes, kind- i guess i would say both. my natural, my innate tendency is to want to keep everything in my head until i have it- whatever it is. umm... but that was... that uh didn’t work so well for me kind of early on because i got a lot of feedback that like my ideas were too complex, and my writing was too cryptic and so- and my mother was an english teacher, and she kept kind of telling me. "but you have to, you know, get things done on paper and then walk away from it" and then allow this incubation time again this kind of period of time where you're not- you can't walk away from it for a year- you have this period of time where you're not actively thinking about it but somethings happening in your brain during this period of time. so once i learned to do that, then you know i think that's when my ability to write you know scientifically, my writing improved dramatically, and then i actually discovered i liked it. for me it's kind of a balance of doing that process but not you can't i cant get away from it too much because then i kind of have to start fresh. right i put something down, don't work on it for a couple months then that whole activation period it doesn’t like its not like it goes back to zero but it still you have a huge activation barrier -to use a chemistry term- : yeah so- it's like you're kind of keeping it in your head, you're holding it you know like you kind of feel it but you're also having that rest period a little bit where you know it's kind of doing something by itself. not really, but it feels like it, you know things- it's like a cooking process right. you put the ingredients in the pot but they're not soup until... you know they've had all this time to simmer. i had to learn when i was making soup- my grandmother made the most amazing chicken soup and my father learned to make the chicken soup and i consider myself a good cook even from the time i was young. my first attempts at making chicken soup were horrible and it wasn't until i stumbled across in a book that you never let it boil. you never let it boil. as a scientist it was interesting to me why because when you boil it then you know all of these collagenous protein that are being leeched from the bones and other things you put in the soup they rise to the top and you pull them off as the this kind if foam and scum and you're removing them. but the come slowly and you remove them slowly the minute you boil the soup then they become mixed into the liquid and become an emulsion and the soup will never clarify and will always taste bad. and so that kind of process of your doing right. you're not- you haven't walked away from the soup you can't walk away from it-it won't be great soup but you also can't rush it through this process so.  : oh i see : mhm : yes yes yes : it does actually... but for me it doesn’t happen well maybe it's just anymore i don't take time off. i think i should, but i don't. so i never, i really don’t have that. but whenever i did, i never felt like i got any great ideas laying on the beach or something. um they always come in this kind of that [didn't understand word] process when i've been kind of engaged -actively engaged- in some aspect of that process, then ideas come. but for me they don't... they don't come in period of true rest or just out of nowhere.  : hmm.... oh wow there's just so much huh to think about there. ummm i mean i think from a broader perspective and this interested me in some of the tasks we did for this study. um to me they in some ways they were the caricature of what people think creative people are, you know. yeah they're either really socially awkward um particularly scientists of course we get this right. i get told by people, "you don't look like a scientist". you know, and i take it as a compliment now. when i was younger i was offended. um but you know i think the stereotypes about you know what creative people are like i mean they are stereotypes. i mean to be creative we don't have to have mental illness. we don't have to so awkward that our clothes don't match. um you know, we don't have to like games. i hate games. - laughs- i hate puzzles and games i hated all that part this testing/ : /and my stubbornness!! i was like fighting, okay what was i inhibiting? stubbornness to say i'm just not gonna do this because this is no indication of my creativity! huh right? : yes? : yes yes  : yes : -laughs- : maybe! that's right i don't people to tell me what to do and tell me how to do it! i've always felt that way and maybe that was part of why i said i thought my ideas were better you know. i don't like people to tell me how to do something. i, to me, it takes all the fun out of it you know. i like to figure that out for myself. so anyways/ interviewer: anyhow i apologize for our test: / oh no no! i just laughing  : my husband in this study and he loves games and puzzles he's been playing puzzler forever his father watched jeopardy oh i'm sure he had a blast! my family loves to play games they think i'm such a sourpuss. so i mean what do you have to inhibit to be creative? um... geez i don’t know.  : maybe that’s the disagreeableness you just don't inhibit. uh i mean you know a lot of what we do today is not again, to go against the stereotype, the stereotype is this creative person kind of sitting in a room by themselves going, " eureka!" and all of a sudden a paintings coming or something but really i mean at least in science a lot of what we do now today is group process. so i think there you know you do have to have you know- you do have to have social skill have to be able inhibit. you can't dominate a room- even if you want to. well, sometimes i do it now just because i think its what's needed you know. you have to be able to work with other people, you have to be able maybe to inhibit you know what's kind of flying through your own brain, to listen to what other people you know are saying and kind of invite that into your own way of thinking. so i think there is some maybe you're inhibiting their stereotype, stereodopy of stereotype behaviors. i think that’s very interesting. i think that is maybe a stereotype that i find to be true at least in scientists is that they do seem to have a high propensity for repetition. whether it be repetitive thought, maybe because you're just trying to work through something or even repetitive doing, which is so necessary in science. um we were talking about the traits in students that you know make them succeed. that's a trait. you can have a student with great ideas but if they can't pipette something a thousand times they can never have the opportunity to test their idea. so that ability to persist through that repetition and a lot of people i know in science- they actually enjoy that. um and they have to even balance the fact speaking of kind of ocd like in their you know, even in their personal lives. it can be unpleasant for the people around them right. my husband and i have this whole thing in the kitchen about what sponge gets used where and when. one of the things we like about each other- we always explain well i do have a reason and it's that kind of you know that, everything has to be thought through a thousand times for what's the best way to do it. and um so we appreciate it in each other but we would drive other people crazy and so. i think that is something that you know maybe that’s part of the process you know. it doesn't... things just don’t... when it all falls on the table and its there -the idea or the product- its because you've been able to go around around around around around around something so. and you like, you enjoy it. -laughs- : hm... -sighs- let me see... well i think i think its worth saying that having some sort of stress associated with it also kind of forces me to get something done. and when i say get something done i'm not talking about- i even mean creative things. you know their having you know, some external need to have something finished at a deadline you know. promise to somebody else, or something you know can kind of, because it always the most pleasant process, its draining you know. i mean it can be really draining and so sometimes you tend to want to avoid it a little bit you know. but, but needing to have to get something done can uh you know force you into that so... and there's a stress associated with that, and that's kind of also a love hate relationship with stress. i think that many of us have but certainly its part of the creative process i feel like i have that.i must love it enough because i keep doing it over and over.  : mhm : right right right oooh i think about that in the context of giving talks. yes i mean this year i gave a ton of talks in places i probably thought i'd never be invited to give talks and we had this breakthrough last year i think we got some funding for it and it was you know. the people that got funded were published that’s my guess that’s then generated these invitations to give talks at you know [many universities]. and i all of a sudden was going and felt that feeling like you know-where i could of never given those talk when i was younger in my career earlier but that stress right now sitting in front of a really knowledgable audience and also you know judgemental -laughs- right. highly disagreeable audience  : yeah! well –laughs_ i don’t know about that. yeah it is interesting i felt that also in performance in music. i can think back to you know when i was at the height of my performing not certainly now. you know, having that capability to go and perform a really difficult you know piece of music and having the kind of little bit of butterflies you get or nervousness um actually enabling you do to like a better job. you know, instead of causing you to crash and burn. i mean you do crash and burn many times and so you get to that point right.  : but after the talk?? : -laughs- : and i bet its almost like you can't give your best talk unless you have that little bit of that stress energy going : i cant get myself into that real- again its draining. you know how you feel after a talk? it's an hour, but you feel like you've been working for you know 5-6 hours.  : your metabolism is cranking, you know. and so there is that kind of like you know you have to get into that zone and uh yup. : oh i don't know about that i'm really excited. i'm much much excited to see what you find with your study...  2035 (scientists) : -laughs- that’s really funny.  : no, i was um, just telling kendra that i don’t think i consider myself creative, but i consider myself very organized. highly organized, which means that i can get a lot done.  : just do it –laughs-. : yes. : i have not. : idea. : i completely agree. that actually happens to me. that happens to me. if it is undone, it's in the front. it's like get it done, get it done, you need to set up a meeting, you need to get this thing scheduled, you need to finish that paper. once, it's done, psh, out.  : it's – i agree, i agree. : i do, completely. : yeah. : hm? : i do. i do sleep. i need my sleep. so, i do my eight to nine hours of sleep every day. : yes. um... but more or less, the rest of the time, i - i work. so, i have a large research group and they really need attention from me. so, right now, there are twenty-three students, so that’s a big group. it’s not a gigantic group. it’s mid-size, mid-size to large kind of group. it is a significant size. and so, they really require a lot of my time and attention and the thing about what i do is that, first of all, i love it. it’s like a hobby and i…it’s not like i am doing exactly the same thing every - if i work eight or ten hours or even eleven or twelve hours in a day, those twelve hours and sometimes it ends up being five because i have to go to a wedding or you know whatever, something, right? when i’m working, it’s like different things, and so it's like you structure your day. i have a very…so i’m very organized so my schedule is very tightly controlled and so it’s like alright, one hour i’m going to do this and take care of [student name 1] which is one of students and the next hour i’m doing to do this other thing. now, this next hour, i’m going to work on this proposal and you have to let go of the distractions and focus on that item so you can be highly productive during that one hour that you're gunna say work on that one proposal or that one paper. um, and so the issue of not letting….closing the door if that’s the time to close the door…and turning off email –laughs- : because/ : turning off email –laughs-. : i get an email a minute…it’s like ping ,another minute ping, ping…no way…no it is like - and the little noise is damn distracting, yes…so to get rid of all of that stuff and you really focus and then…um…i’m the director of two different centers at ucsd. and so, you know i’m doing my research group, uh…but then i’m the director of the center that provides student services to all of the students in the school of engineering and i became director of this center, which is called the idea student center. it stands for inclusion diversity engineering achievement. it serves all students and all of the services related to the tutoring, and the performing, learning communities, and um student orgs and all of that stuff…all the stuff that has to do with students. it’s part of this center and you know when i acquire that it’s like okay…how am i going to structure my week? because i to have to spend i thought maybe about three concentrated hours on the activities of the idea student center. it turned out to be about three hours per week, but concentrated. meeting one hour with all of the staff members um and you know listening to what they have to say and then me sort of getting all of the work organized for the whole week. it’s like eight am monday morning - monday morning meeting, so that the whole week is sort of structured and if you do that well, you really can start taking care of a variety of things even though they seem so disconnected with each other. so i’m the director of a research center also. so this is the student services center and then there is this research center that i’m just starting. i started it in december. it’s an engineering research center um it’s called the calibaja research center for the resilient materials and systems and it includes about twenty-five faculty members that are researchers, part of the center…um and to think about putting all of that together and being the director of something that will - i think that is going to have a lot of impact…at ucsd and in the region…the calibaja region, southern california and baja, california. um, and so,to bring all of these very different people to the table and have them have the opportunity to express what they have to say. to bring new ideas. to get them to connect to each other, that also is like how are you going to do that? how can you be organized in such a way that that can work out well? and how can you lead the discussion? so, um, alright. i have to put some time into the week to do that. so, you know, these two centers are very, very different in their objectives and so…how do you organize it do that you can do that stuff and that stuff and it just brings sort of a lot of variety into the day. and then, part of the research center, the calibaja research center, is also a lot of interaction with industry. so, how can you fit in dinners with industry representatives and ceos? and so then all of the sudden it becomes something so much more because even though it’s still business, now you’re in social situations. and it’s like okay, that’s a little bit more relaxing. so you are switching from concentrated proposal writing where you’re not letting the email distract you from now…it’s like now i’m going to dinner…now i’m going to meet with the chancellor…not i’m going to go…you know it’s like varieties of things give sort of flavor to the day, instead of just sitting in your lab and thinking about only one thing. i don’t know…i would get saturated probably. : if it’s just too much.  : i do.  : i do. i do that. i definitely do that and rarely - but once in a while - some big deadline occurs and i have to put everything aside and i have to work on this one thing and it’s…when…so big proposals that, multimillion dollar proposals in which i am going to be the pi, that take that kind of effort where you basically you have to drop everything else and concentrate on that in the last in last five days of submission or four days before submission, right? those days tend to be not hugely stressful, but a little bit stressful because i don’t have that variety and i have to drop everything in order to take care of this one thing.  : and i think most researchers in science and engineering where we have the pressure of bringing in a lot of money, and i’m sure you have that experience, right?  : you write nih grants. i write nsf grants and i write dod grants and, you, know when the time comes - when little ones come in like 100k 300k or 500k ones are eh…they're fine. but when you start thinking about the five million-dollar ones and the twenty million-dollar ones. it’s very consuming for the semel institute –laughs-. : -laughs- yes, right. that’s very stressful to get it done. i do have a couple of qualities that i think help me. one is that i am very calm. i am a very calm person. i just take a deep breathe and it’s like okay. let’s just move ahead. i don’t um…i think i’m sure you’ve seen in colleagues and i’ve certainly seen colleagues that get highly, highly, highly stressed and it’s just like almost to the breaking point. in some cases, so bad that they just leave the field. those are the extreme—of course. um, i don’t…that’s not my case. it’s like okay…we can do this. si se puede. that’s what i always say. um, so, i think that helps that i have a very calm attitude towards sort of what needs to happen in a twelve-hour day  : i’m pretty convinced it’s genetic. i’m pretty convinced that it just comes from sort of my genes and the way that my brain functions chemically. i don’t think i acquired any of this kind sort of on my own. i think that i probably - in recognizing it - i have probably gotten better at it, but i think there’s some genetic predispositions to being a calm person. not – you know in the case of people that are highly stressed all the time and even to the point of being clinically you know, bipolars and ups and downs. that’s all genetic  : really?  : interesting. : hm. interesting : my father was a very calm person. he had issues. he was an alcoholic, but he was not a violent alcoholic. in fact, when he drank, he would get even more calm. he would just sit on the couch and just basically just sort of fall asleep. he left when i was six years old and i’m the oldest of five and then my mother raised us on her own. he basically just disappeared from our lives. my mom is uh... is not a calm person. she is a go-getter. and i think i probably sort of inherited the good aspects of both sides. the calmness um... and you know the family from my father’s side…if i look at his sisters (my aunts) they’re too calm as in to the point where you would even give them the adjective of lazy, too calm. my father was like that and my mother is like, you know, super hard worker and go-getter and let’s get things done to the point of sometimes running herself like you know like a chicken without a head and i think that i acquired sort of both sides in a almost a better way i would say. so/ : yes. i’m grateful. i'm grateful to them. all of my…and there are five of us…my siblings are all also like that. my sister, [sister 1], so she actually came to - she did her undergrad here at ucla in latin american studies and political science and then she did a master’s at harvard kenny’s school of government. and then [sister 2] is a chemist from ucsd. [sister 3] is a chef. all my sisters are very accomplished. my brother, too, he actually did his undergrad here at ucla too, electrical engineer, and he is slightly more on the calmer side. he has more of the father characteristics of calmness and whereas the four girls, maybe we are more somewhat closer to our mother. um, so that is interesting. one of the things that my sister [sister 2] used to work at a lab at ucsd when she was an undergrad that was studying addictions in the medical school and they were interested…they found out that my father was an alcoholic. and so he suffered from addictions also…uh a smoker like three pack a day kind of... so addictions are sort of... it’s not just…it’s the same kind of trigger in the mind and they actually did a study on us because all five of us are not alcoholic or into gambling or none of us have ever smoked. so there, it was  like yeah, we did not inherit the addiction gene…because i think that associates/ : yeah.  : addiction is also…uh there are genetic predispositions to addiction. : so none of us have it. all of five of us are not addicted to anything. : so they actually took blood and did a bunch of stuff. i don’t know the outcome of that is… i suppose some papers. : but it you look at population studies or you look at father and mother that is an addictive person…the possibility of all five children not at all having any addictions is pretty low, right?  : yes –laughs-.  : um…there are several. one is... writing… so i wrote a strategic plan for the idea student center and it was approved last may by the dean of engineering…uh to me, that has been a major accomplishments because i did my undergrad at ucsd and when i was there at ucsd, there was a program called the minority engineering program that eventually was dissolved because of prop 209 so once i left, i went to davis for the phd, then prop 209 came about and they got rid of all of the…all of the uc schools had a mep program…i don’t know if you even…you’re not in engineering, you’re more in the medical school area and biological sciences, but all schools of engineering have or used to have these mep programs that really helped minorities and i received a lot of benefit from the mep program at ucsd when i was there. in terms of building community, hanging out with latinos, with people that you can relate to. and when i arrived at ucsd now as a professor - because i had a couple of other faculty positions before coming back - so i have been at ucsd for three and half years and when i arrived, i knew there was no more mep. that i was clear on because i had actually followed the outcomes of prop 209 in the uc system, but it didn’t quite hit me how bad it was. by the time it arrived, the idea center had already been founded and the reason that it was founded is because there was this major racial incident at ucsd back in…about six years ago…six, seven years ago…it even has a name…it’s called the compton cookout. it was pretty dramatic for the whole campus - i wasn’t there yet - but it was actually quite um traumatic for the... especially the black community and the black students. you know, one of the several incidents of this whole thing the fiasco…was that they put a rope, noose in front of the library…hanging in front of the library so like hanging you know like a lynching of black…i mean that’s horrible, right? it brings back all of the jim crow and slavery and it’s pretty horrible. well, students. when that happened, they brought back the idea center and it had been basically in existence more or less for about a year a half by the time i had arrived…by the time that i arrived. and when i saw it, i was like this is not what it used to be for me. you know, we need to do something for our students. so, i actually met with the dean. i invited him to lunch and i met with him and i told him what i am seeing in the idea center is not what i think where we need to be in terms of providing for support for all of our students ,our diverse students, all of our students. and he’s like "okay, write a strategic plan" and i was like…oh…great… now i have to do that  : that’s right. so, then i did and then i became the director once he saw that…you know he really liked it. we called it the students’ success initiative and we are now in the process of implementing it. so, to come back to my alma mater and to know that i am implementing a plan that is going to have an impact for all of our engineering students over the next twenty years is really uh pretty awesome. : um…that’s one. the other one is i just become a member of the mexican academy of engineering  : mhm… next step in a? the us and a –laughs-. and so um, that’s pretty cool…i mean that to me was like, alright. that’s like a little - it’s not an accomplishment that i did anything, it’s just an award, but i really highly value it because it’s from mexico, my home country, um and there are very few women in the mexican academy of engineering and so it’s just a little sort of a little award that i find highly - probably one of the most rewarding awards that i have received. maybe the most rewarding award that i have received and it just happened a month ago. so, this is really cool.  : it depends on how you define that…i grew up in tijuana. so, my parents were also born and raised in tijuana. i was born and raised in tijuana…all of my siblings…even my grandfather on my mom’s side was born and raised in tijuana…so were are several generations baja californians. um uh, when i graduated high school in tijuana, i went to ucsd and three of the five years of my undergraduate at ucsd, i lived at home…in tijuana…right…back and forth and two of the years/ : well, no. i drove.  : no...no. this was the early 90s. the early 90s was a very different/ : no….no…no that's right, that idiot. -laughs- : um well i have very strong opinions about him and i can’t even believe that he’s getting so close to the nominations. it's like it really tells something about where we are at in this country…yeah. it’s unbelievable. : well, that's the point right. : no way. : that’s right.  : that’s right…because i am completely baffled. me too. i have, in the last couple of months, i have actually been to several high schools and universities in baja… because associated with my research center the calibaja center for resiliant materials. uh, establishing collaborations with baja california is very important to me…it is my home state…and um that has come up. whenever somebody asks me what…why i am doing this? because i am building bridges…not walls. so, uh/ : no  : i did not see that. what?  : oh, god.  : yes, of course. good for her. good for her. you know, i became a us - and now i have dual citizenship - uh i uh i become a us citizen in 1996 and so i was what, twenty four years old or so…and um i have never been so angry at the system…just donald trump and…i never thought that i would get involved in politics. i really have never been ever interested at all, but if the opportunity comes and i am in put in a position where i can speak against him, it doesn’t matter what others may say - you’re putting yourself in the cross hairs, you know in the cross fire of stuff - but if i get the opportunity somehow, i will, because i am angry and so, in any case…um the so the five years of my undergrad, two of them i lived in the dorms at ucsd and the other three i lived in tijuana. so, how can you define when i moved to the us?  : yes, because i actually grew up in the boarder and honestly, i think tijuana and san diego are the same city. there is just a boarder in the middle. i don’t think of having lived in mexico and living in the us. if you really want to define it, um, it’s really when i went to davis for the phd, because, of course, then i moved to northern california and that was in 1995.  : no, i couldn’t go home every day –laughs-. so, 1995 when i started my phd. when people ask me, i usually say that. i usually say, oh, i moved to the us for the phd to davis. and they are like, "oh so you did your undergraduate in mexico?" no, i did my undergraduate at uc san diego and they are like, " well wait a minute…" -sighs-. the concept  of crossing the boarder every day is very foreign to most people, but it is not foreign at all in the boarder. the boarder is the busiest boarder in the world. lots of people cross every day to go to school, to go to work, and so...  : huge.  : um…gigantic. it has had a gigantic effect on the way that i view the world. um, the value that i place on being bicultural, binational, bilingual, and those are main goals in my center by the way. one of the thrusts of the center is – there are two main research thrusts and then the third thrust of the center is the development of the 21st century engineer which is precisely bilingual, bicultural, binational, that can cross boarders seamlessly, that be global, that can work in taiwan as easily as they can work in mexico and china and in the united states for example. building bridges not walls you see?  : uh huh. and um i…it gives me a level of comfort in the united states that i think people that were not born in the boarder uh... uh don’t have. so, the... fluidness in terms of understanding uh, the way the us functions even if you are living in mexico and crossing the boarder to go to school or, heck, crossing the boarder the buy milk…uh which we used to do when we were young when the lines were short. just walk across buy milk and come back….um so that i think gives me a level of understanding that allows me to really feel very comfortable on both sides and interacting with all kinds of people in that way um and that has had a huge affect on my worldview so... : mhm.  : interesting.  : it's all multicultural. : yes, that's right. : oh, good grief. : and they don't even understand it! : -laughs- just in the right language.  : i think i would. : yup. so, my grandfather, who was born in 1917, i told you he was born in uh you know…he lived in tijuana…he was born and raised in tijuana…uh i said it that way…but actually he was…really…not strictly he was not born in tijuana…he was born in san diego and he was born in san diego because back then in 1917 there was only one hospital in the whole region, san diego tijuana. that hospital was a naval hospital in san diego um because of course san diego has always been a naval city, right?  : um…the midwife told my great grandfather, who was born in ensenada. tijuana was not even existing yet…when my great grandfather was born. ensenada was really sort of the seat and it was a territory back then. : um he was... he moved to tijuana sort of when it was being uh considered all of the sudden a municipality and um the midwife told my great grandfather that mother and baby were in danger that there was…and you know midwives are very good, they can tell a lot of things. um…to take my great grandmother to the naval hospital in san diego because they may die otherwise because all children in tijuana were born at home…it’s 1917. so, off they go in the horse car from tijuana to san diego and my grandfather was actually born a us citizen because he was born in the naval hospital. there was no boarder back then… and um... : yes. they go through/  : yes. right. there was some kind of road because a lot of the supplies came from san diego because it was a big port, right? so, a lot of supplies to tijuana came from san diego so there was a dirt connection between the two cities. um…and so this is sort of the cultural ancestry that i bring…it’s like being rooted in baja california in a very definite way, over several generations, even all the way to my – um, the mother of my great grandfather was born in baja as well and so you know back when alta california, that is california, was still a mexican territory. so, being rooted in that, and really feeling like this is home and this is where i belong, gives it sort of another level of ownership in terms of yeah, at some point the boarder was produced and you know this territory now became us, but you know what, my family was here even before that even happened. so, i think that that brings in this feeling of belonging that is certainly very important in my family and is very important to me. feeling a part of this region - both sides of the boarder, no matter what, you know. i think that that brings…a lot of the things that i have been doing comes i think from that…from that cultural heritage. : so, i can tell you about that cali baja center. you know, this was... another major accomplishment that is connected to that um in a sense and sort of the precursors to this was really the feeling that the latino engineering faculty, we didn’t know who we were, we didn’t connect with each other we didn’t…so, um so i decided at some point about ten years ago that i was going to start looking for them and i was going to bring them together…and i have. um…one of the society of hispanic professional engineering conferences that i belong to…the largest gathering of latino engineering faculty ever to happen and ever to occur. nsf gave me money to do this. like i told nsf what i wanted to do and like oh! that is very creative. so, you see. i don’t think that is particularly creative…i just think that there is a feeling of bringing people together…pfffff…  : does it? i guess so. i don’t know if it doesn’t occur to everybody or most people are lazy and they don’t want to do it. i don’t know. um, so, i did. um…i’m actually finishing a paper because i found all the latino engineering professors across the country and i’m finishing a paper on who they are. um…geographic location, gender certainly, but also very importantly country of origin and the reason that country of origin has become particularly important for this specific population, the latino engineering faculty in the us, is because over 90% of them are not from the us. they are immigrants. so, what does that mean to me? it means that we are doing very little to promote graduate education and the professoriate among latinos they were born and raised in this country. born and raised in this country is a very different upbringing compared to being born and raised in argentina or chile or venezuela or columbia or mexico where…where…over there, you’re the majority and over here being….having the... the designation or minority, is a completely different feeling and so you bring something very different to the table and if we want to educate our young people in the sciences and stem and have them then become successful at the level of professor etc. well, we need to provide role models and yes, the latino engineering professor from argentina can serve as role model no doubt. the latino professor from mexico can serve as role model. but, if you can tell a group of students, here is this latino engineering professor that was born and raised in east la, that is totally different. like somebody that was born and raised in my barrio and somehow managed to get…you know…out of this and become highly successful…so, i brought all of these latino engineering faculty together and we started collaborating and talking and forming this wonderful friendships. there are somehow six hundred of us. i know all of them. um, so, that sort of started me on the road of uh thinking about the latino community in a very different way with respect to graduate education and the professoriate in particular um in coming to the understanding of sort of who we were and what that needs to be done in order to promote higher education among latinos in this country um... that then opened the door thinking about bringing - so, my cali baja center includes a variety of researchers, but all of the mexican professors at ucsd are part of it. all of them. so, i show up at ucsd and they don’t know each other. i was like this is ridiculous. so, what i discovered about myself, and maybe you want to give it the term creative, i have discovered about myself that i am very good at bringing people together. that’s why i am the director of two centers. i can bring people together. i can organize them. i can put them together. i can shake hands. i can smile and give people a level of comfort. i guess i call it empathy. so, having this connectedness with people and the empathy and bringing everyone together, i am very good at that.  : um…i think it probably comes from…i think it’s genetic for sure…there is some genetic predisposition to having empathy. : yeah, 50%. -laughs- i don’t know. i want to attribute everything to genetics maybe….not necessarily right…well there is some/ : yeah. um…no, i think, in this case, there is something associated with the way that i was brought up. so, i’m the oldest of five. my father left when i was six years old. um, i was very quickly put in charge of my brothers - my sisters and my brother. um…you know…to the extent that by…when i….by the time i was 13 years old, i was already driving and taking my siblings to school and taking myself to school in tijuana. no driver’s license. i didn’t have a driver’s license until i was eighteen, but that’s tijuana –laughs-. : i did, uh… : uh huh.  : yes.  : yes. so, i think it has to…there is probably also something to do with the fact that i am the oldest and the oldest child always is more responsible i think compared to the youngest, which are more the rebels and that applies in my family for sure. um…you know, i was by the book in many things, you know, in following my mother’s um teachings and attitudes with respect to responsiveness and responsibility um…and sort of the moral guidelines that are set for a girl that is, you know, is raised as a catholic, which i actually broke away from that, by the way. um, this conversation i know is confidential and you are going to use some information but/ : and i don’t care. i mean, it’s more or less public that i am an atheist. um, but you know i broke away from all of that and at this point i’m just like i don’t believe any of that…none of it…none of it…and um but my siblings did it much sooner than me. they started doing things that i would have never done. like my youngest sister, for example, moved in with her boyfriend before getting married. i would have never have done something like that. um, at the same time from a very young age, i think because i was given a lot of responsibility - even in high school, i considered myself very responsible. like i would not do stupid things. and i tell students all the time, if you want guidelines for life, okay. number one, don’t do stupid things. you know what they are. you know what they are. don’t do them. it’s very simple, right? don’t do stupid things. and i didn’t. i didn’t. i understood the difference and i don’t mean - and i also explain this to my students a lot of the time- i don’t mean errors in life. we all commit errors. nobody’s perfect. and…um…if you make an error, you correct. you recognize it, you correct, you move forward. i don’t mean errors and those are learning opportunities. i mean really doing the stupid thing because and you know it’s stupid and you do it anyway. : i would not...i do not do that. : mhm. : that’s interesting. i’ve never heard of this.  : absolutely. i’ve never heard it described that way. i never even had come to the realization that this is something that would be of interest to the study of something like this. for sure it’s something that applies to me. i inhibit stupidity. i stop myself and then i think, "okay. what are the consequences of my actions?", and then i move in the direction that i think that is more appropriate. that, however, doesn’t mean that i don’t like exploring. so, for example, i am very sexually open. that comes from the realization, later in my life, in my twenties, that i was not bound by the rules of the catholic church and i ended up doing several things that removed me from the moral precepts of the church in a very um conscience way. and i’m going to give you one example that you know my friends know about and they find it outrageous. so, in the catholic church, and in many other religions, uh, and certainly in you know the bible belt in this country and sort of a generality across the world  it would be best if woman were virgins were before - when they got married, right? (phone ringing in background) sorry, i have no idea who that is. and so, certainly my mother was when she got married and i’m quite certain that my grandmother was and many of my aunts and by the time we got my cousins, not so much. um, it could have been an impulse for them. i don’t know. i haven’t had this discussion with most of my cousins. i have like five hundred of them. so…you know…it’s basically impossible. they are all in tijuana. um, i decided in a very conscience way, first of all, that in high school, even though there were girls that were sexually active and several became pregnant, that to me is stupidity to the nth degree. high school pregnancies, i mean stupid. in high school, in a very conscience way, i said, "i am not ready for sex. i’m not going to do sex in high school. this is not for me right now, because i am, you know, seventeen, sixteen years old. you cannot be having a intimate relationship like that with a man or a boy at this point." because i wasn’t’ going to go around with a thirty year old, right? you know another stupid little seventeen year old. and you know boys, that’s all they want. and i understand that. it’s all hormones for them. i mean i feel sorry for them. poor little seventeen year olds, it’s very sad. so sad. um, i have come to understand that seventeen year olds much better now as i get older. i was like i feel so sorry for them in high school. um, i decided in a very conscious way i was not, but the day i was going to be ready and i figured i was going to be ready in college. i didn’t know when, but when it happened, i was going to do it with somebody for whom i did not feel love. with somebody that i had no intention of having any kind of long term relationship. it wasn’t going to be the first time is out of love…and…no way. i was going to lose my virginity to some random guy that was completely unimportant to us, to me. because, my worth to me as a woman is not in between my legs. and so that…uh…and i did that…like i started going out with this guy…i was like this is the time. i don’t love him. i don’t care. i was like this is the moment. i’m not going - i refuse to do my first time because i love somebody. i refused to. and that’s exactly what i did. three months later we broke up - i mean he was sort of my little boyfriend - three months we broke up and/  : i achieved my goal –laughs-. so that, i think would be maybe…a lot…very scandalous to a lot of people…um…and i have done other things in my life like that that would be considered scandalous from the point of view from the catholic precepts and other religion precepts um., but i always do them very consciously. so, you know, the people that i have told them oh no my first time i did it completely with no love. it was like a one night stand almost and that was a choice. and they are like, "what? how could you choose that?" and i was like because my worth as a woman is not between my legs.  : and so other things i can tell you about that that sort of follow the same lines. it’s like, okay. in a conscious way, not stupidly, i decide i’m going to do this because i want the experience and i’m going to do it.  : um…i do. um, i do have one problem, and a lot of people have this problem. i am terrible at remembering names. like when i first get introduced to somebody, some people have this skill of within the first 20 seconds they actually paid attention and then... i am terrible at that. i am very good at doing this when it comes to numbers. like recalling a phone number, the first 20 seconds, you know i get told a number, it’s like i’ll remember. uh i get told a particular directions and then i just have to do a conscious sort of move it the immediate, to the more permanent memory, right? i’m terrible at remembering names. it always - it’s almost like it comes in one ear out the other and that’s not good. i’ve actually put effort into paying attention when i am getting introduced to somebody so that the name sticks. i don’t know why that is. i don’t know what is it about names. : i don’t know. um…maybe i’m just…okay…let me think about that. like in a party situation, what happens? why do i not recall names? what am i doing that allows, that you know prevents me from…i’m probably too distracted thinking about what is happening in the entire room. like i’m looking at the whole situation…like who’s over there? why’s over that? like making connections more broadly instead of focusing in the moment with the person that i’m being introduced with. yeah, that’s probably what i am doing –laughs-. : right… : i think i’m going to have to look into that –laughs-. : so, um, when, you know going back to, going to the research and publication of papers and the actual science, um…i think that a lot of the capacity to say write a compelling proposal that has interesting ideas, an interesting hypothesis, i’ve really gotten better as - and a lot of it i actually think it’s experience. you know, the more you think about problems and you learn more, the better you get at it and the more compelling your hypotheses become. and i think in the last ten years in particular, um i have had a particularly creative face in terms of the science and it comes from having all of these previous experiences and all this knowledge that sort of just came together and then all of the sudden it’s like ah, but now let’s do this. and i don’t think... so i certainly don’t consider myself a genius, not at all uh...i, you know, there are twenty year olds that are producing seminal work in cosmology for example and writing the theory behind black holes and, you know, i’m not like that. that’s not me. i’m not einstein. even einstein was not quite like the twenty year olds, some of the twenty five year olds that i have encountered,  really really big brained kind of people that i…i think that i…big brained is what i call them. i’m i think more about the connectedness of things and the - having learned a lot of things and then just putting it together in the right way. um, so…i’ve gotten better and better as i get older at this and it’s been, you know, it - the other important aspect i think in terms of this connectedness is to start collaborating and learning from others and getting ideas from others and then deciding that you can put it together into some kind of hole with the collaborate -the right collaborations. um, so in some proposals i’ve co-pi - you know it wasn’t my idea - and in other proposals, i am the pi. it was really my main idea but it was like about bringing people together that can really support this main goal or this main idea. i really have gotten good at that in the last ten years and so the most creative you know papers have come out in the last few years. one recent one for example that has gotten a lot of attention came out about three weeks ago it already got - it’s in the ninety nine percentile of downloads for papers of the same age, it just came out in scientific reports. um, that one was a collaborative work but is really was an effort of several years of thinking about the problem…and having it come together…um so… : so it's good, i appreciate that. : oh no problem, it was fun. it was more time consuming than i thought i have to say, but –laughs-. : it's fine, it was interesting. : yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. : mhm. : okay : okay. okay. : okay. : okay. no, i haven't. : it's going to be interesting. : oh god. well, well my guess is the main, the main thing, the key item is my ph. d pieces. i guess that was the most, uh it was a lot, a ton of work. it was many years of work. uh, but you know i'm particularly proud of that. umm yeah, i... i - do you want me to go more into detail about it? : okay um. well, you know i'm a scientist, so i'm sure this is going to sound a little bit boring –laughs-. : yeah, yeah, yeah. : so uh well, the reason why i'm proud of it is that is you know it was an original idea that i had and it was uh, um, kind of the first time that anyone thought about uh building circuits like complex circuits out of molecules. not, not just uh oh you know, um say, say you have um... uh a gene you want to activate in a cell uh to respond to a certain que um uh. please, please stop me if anything i say makes no sense to you. : okay, um. but uh so what we did was we, we were trying to do something more, way more complex. so we were trying to imitate what a computer clock drives other circuits in a  computer. so we were trying to do the same thing was in a molecular clock and other molecular devices and i thought that, you know, was a neat idea. i managed to combine experiments and stimulations and numerical analyses of the system. and i don’t know, it sounded like a really complete, nice story. um and uh, i think its uh, personally, i think it's going to help move forward the whole idea of um uh of building systems with molecules rather than with electrical circuits. so that was – that's why i'm particularly proud of it. and especially because i could manage to do both, both sides of the project, you know, the experiment and the um the stimulations, so. : it was a ton of work, but it was worth it. : i think that um, well a, i'm persistent. –laughs- very much. i'm very stubborn, um not um maybe that is even detrimental a lot of times. but i think persistence was the key. umm but also the fact that i'm interesting - interested in a lot of things. so, i don’t uh. let's say i preferred to know a little bit about a lot of things rather than being a super expert in one single thing. : that’s kind of what distinguishes me from other people i know.  other scientists i know, they just love to delve deeper and deeper into the details of, of their individual niche.  : um, i am not like that. and i think if you are going to do an interdisciplinary science, it's important that you that you keep your eyes on a lot of different things. and maybe you don't have the deepest knowledge about all of them um, but um, that enables you to connect things that otherwise you wouldn’t connect. and maybe the fact that you're not a super expert in all of these things um, uh facilitates the process because you take um new ideas with more ingenuity um and you try to do things that maybe an expert wouldn't even try to do because they would think, "oh, you know, that cannot not ever work." um but because you're a little naïve, you think, "well, let's try and maybe we'll figure it out." so that's, that's i think what helped me.  : well, i don’t know, i have to say that it goes back to childhood. i mean i was always very interested in a lot of things... um... i, i was kind of weird in the context of my family. i'm the first in my family to go to college. and uh, although my, my family valued education very much, um none of them really knew what it was about. and so, i was almost the weirdo in the family. does that make sense? : and so, it's always been with me that i always wanted to learn especially about, you know when you're a child, more about nature, animals, dinosaurs, um all that kind of stuff. and then you know, growing up, i was just always very interested in learning a lot of different things. : uh. mostly nature. but i was also much into um, art, um, i loved play the piano and i loved to draw. i've always been kind of multi, multi-disciplinary –laughs- i would say. so it's always been with me uh i mean i, i - you know that – once i read an article that actually described um this feeling really well. most people um, hate feeling stupid, feeling that they don’t know something. but for me, that's kind of a challenge. like yeah, i it, it's not like, well i don’t know it, well i want to know what this is. i want to learn it. and even though that takes a lot of frustration sometimes and a lot of work, but um, i have that drive. i that’s - and i've always had it i feel. i cannot identify a precise moment in which it happened. : uh, you know, i actually don't know. i can't tell. i, yeah i, i have to say my, my parents, per se, not really have any particularly high achievements, um from the point of view of education. um, um, so i don't really know uh. i guess from my mom's side, there were – there was for example, one person was really good at drawing um, and in general, they were more into the, the education they couldn’t receive because they went to, you know world war. they were very poor. but despite all those challenges, they, they valued, you know, learning, and and, and i think that maybe that’s - i could have maybe get it, got it from there um, but i really don’t know what i could have inherited from, from family. yeah. : uh. i really wouldn’t know. i mean books were available but not – i wouldn't say they were available to me in a proportion like significantly larger than the other kids. i guess, so one thing, one thing that i always think about and that i think helped is i grew up in italy and the school system there um is very different from here. so local schools um - so first of all, there's no segregation in terms of income. so, i come from a little town and it was in my school it was a mixed environment. so the richest kids and the poorest kids, they were in the same class. and i feel that um that allowed me to look at um school mates who clearly have more um more like a better family environment than what i had and like i don’t know, their fathers were lawyers or professors and so i used to hang out with these kids and in a way, learned from them. um, i learned you know that it is, that is it good to study hard you know and there was an environment where the competition was um was significant in terms of you know, who was, i don't know, the best kids in the class. i know this sounds silly when you're six years old, what do you know about grades and life in general? but i feel the fact that it was a mixed environment and, and i could kind of see myself as capable of doing as well as the other kids, you know that came from that came from different family and different backgrounds. i think that kind of gave me some confidence um, to work hard. does that make sense? : hm, let me see. i'm thinking because of.. you know, i wouldn’t know honestly. i wouldn’t be able to identify like a specific one mentor. it was more like a lot of people, a lot of people who, um, consistently valued learning in my life. um, not, not anyone in specifically. but i feel i was lucky to, to have access to these people, um whether it is like a relative or a teacher. um but, but you know again, i would like to stress that i come from a different cultural situation than the united states. and so even though i come from a relatively lower middle class family, i always had access to education of all kinds and it was cheap or free. so, that i think made a big difference. : i think it is very important. so, okay so if you talk about - so if we talk about later years, um later you know college, of course mentors are important. at that point, um, it is, it is uh, essential that you have someone who can um give you tips, you know, on how to navigate the system and believe in you. so, italy in that sense, is not the greatest place. um, i have, for example i have once been toldi n an interview that a women at twenty seven years old, she is done. nobody would want to employ her because um, you know, she is going to have kids and get married, and nobody would want to employ her. i was told this in a job interview.  : so the environment in italy is, is much more um sexist than it is, than it is here. and so it was particularly important that i actually found mentors like college level college professors that were actually pushing me to, to become and academic and pursue that, that route. so that was very important. um, so i kind of forgot what your initial question was. : the mentorship that i do. : yeah, i mean, i try to as much as i can. i try to mentor um people who are thinking about pursuing a career in academia um... and uh, yeah i try to do as many opportunities as i have possible. and i think that mentoring comes into all sorts of forms. it doesn’t have to be an official thing, it can even be, you know, grabbing a drink at a conference. that is important to have those opportunities. and so my um, field of research is male dominated. and sometimes, you don’t get those opportunities like grabbing a drink at a conference. you know in which you informally get a lot of mentorship. so, i try to do that with females or males, with whoever, but i feel that is essential. interviewer: yeah. um, what are the things you try to pass on to people who are just coming up in the field? what advice can you give them?: well, um, i don't - it's not really the technical knowledge. it's more like try to do something that makes you happy and that you feel rewarded about. um, and it's just a lot about personal interactions. um, so, so again, as a female in a male dominated field, um sometimes you think, you know, you assume certain behaviors are normal and okay but sometimes they are not. and so, um, you know, i advise on how, you know, male versus female happen to interact with either students or postdocs or between, between each other. um, i advice in that sense. you know, what is okay, what is not okay. what is, um, a good way to behave with your students, what is not a good way to behave with your students. but that, that i advise i think more soft skills than technical skills. because technical skills, you get them from books. : right. : right. ah. well i don’t know, i'll give you an example. my former - one of my former phd advisers ended up marrying his, his postdoc. and that created a really awkward situation in the lab, as you can imagine. : that would never be something that is allowed in a in an industry environment, right? but i feel like most males in the group felt that that was okay, right, it's not a big deal. haha. but for the females, it was not really okay. : uh, yeah. no it wouldn't. but, at other places it does. -laughs- i don't know i cannot imagine doing anything like that at ucr either. but i guess some private schools, it’s a little bit less uh, problematic. anyway, but/ : yeah, so anyway, this is probably the worst example i could possibly give. but, you know, it's stuff like that. : yes. yes, yes, yes. um, definitely. uh, the first thing i think about is, um, is management of students and groups. i believe that, um, women tend to be, um, more respectful and more - they care more about harmony within the group. um, i mean, i know this sounds probably like trivial, and um maybe sexist in itself, too, but it's an observation.  : they just tend to be - they tend to be better at creating harmony and uh, uh, happiness in the group.  : even if you have, you know, i have a lot of skype meetings. like this one, with colleagues because they are all over the place. i feel that when there's a prevalence of women, the conversation - or, you know half and half - the conversations tend to be much more pleasant and polite and conducive to them making progress. : sometimes, when it's majority of men, you know, i, i, again, this is like a very partial sample of it. i'm not making claims of generality. but, men can be a little more um, uh... aggressive and um, how should i say... i mean, maybe it is my perspective that is skewed. you know sometimes it is easy to have something said that is rude by a man than women. but again, you know. it's, it's my own personal observations. i wouldn’t generalize this to humanity. : well, i haven't had too many students, yet. um, but uh, in my group, the ones who are doing the best are the ones who are persistent. um, i feel like, it it's true what they say. you know, genius is one percent... sorry yeah, genius is one percent inspiration and ninety-nine percent perspiration. i think that’s very true for science. so, for example, you know, i have, i have one student who is maybe the most creative i have. but when it comes down to actually writing publishing and finishing up projects, he is terrible. but i have others, who are maybe less creative, but they are very systematic and they've published much more than the creative ones. so, i feel like in science, persistence and, and, and drive and being systematic is more important than being creative, to a certain extent. : in my domain, the ability to make connections. but i think that's general to any field. ability to make connections and derive ideas from, from those connections that, that you can make even you know that cross that are even different disciplines. um, that i think is the most important aspect of being creative. : uh no, no, no. because, i mean, i mean, you know, especially in my job, it's not just say thinking of painting something and you paint it. it's, it's more about, well, you have an intuition about something which may come from a paper you read or something you hear at a conference, so you retain that little thought. and then, of course, you have to make sure that the idea is grounded into some, um, many people think scientific hypothesis. so the next thing that i would, of course, is read more papers and write and draw schemes. i think that, that always helped me throughout my career, um draw schemes. i, i write a lot on paper. so i try to like write schematics of whatever i'm thinking and um, i think that that’s essential. um, it's even better than writing on a computer. i mean, i have friends who will just start writing like type something on a keyboard. i can't do that very well. i need really a piece of paper and, and like draw diagrams of what i'm thinking. make arrows, connections. and one thing that for me is particularly important is the picture is all on one page. i don’t know if this makes any sense. -laughs- but it’s a lot better if i can, even if i, you know, use a huge piece of paper that i will do it and it has to fit all together on one page. the general idea. um, so. : i think that's a common thing that i do when i'm writing a proposal, when i'm writing a paper, when i'm designing a study, that’s what i do. : but then again the idea can happen anywhere. i mean you can have an idea when you are brushing your teeth, or... does that make sense? it doesn’t come at a specific time or place. : mhm. um, so i have to like partially disagree with that. because like, if you are in math and science, sometimes choosing the simplest thing is the best way to get something done. um, and looking for maybe a more creative and convoluted route, you know, may not, may not be the, the best way to do it. i mean, how do you define best? but um - so i feel that for the way that i have been trained, i actually try to look for the simplest thing to do, not necessarily the most creative, but the simplest. um, but of course, what are you studying, what are you trying to explore, that’s, that's what has to be creative. well has to be - that's what it's good to, you know, like you find more satisfaction in doing it if it's a creative thing, like if it's not something people have already looked at. does that make sense? so, you try to answer - so you to try to ask questions that are new and interesting and that people haven't answered yet otherwise there's no point in asking the question to begin with. but then, how do you go about answering the question? i feel like we look for the simplest way to do it. so it's not necessarily about that thing in your study is going to be very plain in a way and standard because that’s the way that science works and you always want to do the simplest thing, not necessarily the most creative. but then again, the question that you are asking should creative. does that make sense? : yeah, yeah, yeah. : it depends, so, i can tell you what i try to do. um, i have to say, and i'm generally the prototype of the insecure scientist. so generally, unless i am one-hundred per cent sure that my study is correct and there are no mistakes and every control has been done, i won’t publish, i won’t even submit. um, that, in a way is not the best strategy, because especially nowadays because culture is publish, publish, publish. so, i am more of a timid scientist in that scene. that being said, i recognize that, for example, students need to publish to graduate. so, i have a two tier approach, you know, we submit a lot of conference papers that are kind of smallish papers and they more have a value of training. they are not really expecting to get recognition for that stuff. and it's more for training the students. and then, for the important stuff, i really try to complete the work before it's out, if that makes sense. so it might take years. i mean, right now, we are working on a paper that we have been working on for four years. so, that's probably the worst example –laughs-. : uh, yeah. i think it's uh, i would find that correlation in a lot of successful people i know. but, so the negative, inverse correlation with agreeableness, right, that’s what you call it?  : i think that it's not just the fact that these people are nonconformist and that they, you know, may ask the hard questions or uncomfortable questions, i feel like it's also about being self-centered. a lot of very successful scientists, i know, they are very much self-centered and they're pretty much ready to, you know, step on other people, fire other people, or do whatever it takes. i mean, the choices they make are solely for the purpose of getting their science done. so they tend to ignore other constraints. um, for example, you know well being of people around them, um conscientious use of funding. they just do whatever it takes. does that make sense? : yeah, yeah so. : yeah, yeah no it's not for everyone. : ah. they're both equally important. but maybe rationality is more important than, than intuition. like, i can like, you, you have to be very, very systematic and rational about anything that happens. so, i'll give you the example of the paper that we've been working on for so many years. over the years, sometimes, you know, all of the experiments, we plan may not, you know, they were not panning out as we expected. it's easy to get sort of a panic attack about that, right. you've put so much work into this and now that one experiment has been waiting to run and something goes wrong, but you have to be rational. so, rationality is important, most because it leads you to, you know - form the point of view of the scientific method, that's what you have to follow up on the scientific method and it's also important from an emotional standpoint, when you're doing so much, (phone ringing in background) uh... so much work and, and there's so much commitment to it, you have to be rational about it. you cannot, just at some point, get depressed and quit. does that make sense? so, rationality is both from a method point of view and also from a sort of emotional point of view, so yeah. i feel like it's very important. : i, i, i feel that, like, really, you know, have that drive. you know, you are doing something you enjoy and you have the drive to think about it a lot. it's, it's those things where, you know, sometimes you're having dinner with your family and you're like drifting off because you're still thinking about that thing you are trying to figure out. and it's disturbing for your family. -laughs- but i think that that's important to have that kind of commitment and interest in what you're doing that you can't stop thinking about it. if you don't have that, you know, then you are just going to grab the remote and watch the game of thrones. -laughs- you're not going to be thinking about you're work, right. : of all the things i’ve done in my scientific career, um, i think that there are maybe two things that / : oh, are you ringing?  : oh, -laughs- : oh, wow.  : -laughs- : that’s okay. : so, actually, so i’m thinking if i can ask for a little clarification. there are two, um, two ways that i’m sort of thinking about this, one is in the scientific kind of the strictly scientific/research space and uh and then one is ways in which that’s been applied to some of the education and other activities  : so, start with science. i think the thing that, um, that i am most proud of is uh i feel like i’ve had an important impact in thinking about one particular aspect of gene regulations. so, um, my lab is very interested in these long stretches of sequence that interrupt, for example, all mammalian genes and most of them get interrupted multiple times. so, a gene that codes for some function, um, we know the sequence that then makes the protein that goes on and does this function, but then most genes are interrupted multiple times by other things - by other noncoding sequences. so, my lab is interested in understanding how those get removed by the cell in order to stitch the remaining pieces together for a particular gene product. um, and so one of the big conceptual innovations, i think, has been to, um, move beyond just thinking about that reaction in isolation, but think about how that reaction fits into all the other processes that happen in the cell. and, um, and so i think the work that i am the most proud of is advancing the idea that you - we can only really understand that process and that reaction if we understand the reactions that happen just before it and the reactions that happen just after it, um, and so the molecule that gets spliced is called rna and - but that rna has to be made, and so there is a cross talk between the process of synthesizing that rna and then removing those noncoding sequences, um, and that’s been the - that’s been, for me, what's been really exciting is to push the envelope in thinking about the inevitable relationship between these processes.   : yeah. : mhm. : mhm, mhm. : yeah, i think that that’s a really perfect way of saying it. i think that, um, that, i’m trained as a biochemist, and so that’s very reduction - you know - that’s the, uh, the process of reducing things, and so you know you take one process and you put it in a test tube and you study it, um, and so the - in a way that’s been really powerful because it gives us a lot of information about one process but in order to really understand it, it does require a kind of a broader conceptual framework where you sort of take a bigger view of the cell and all of the inner working interlocking parts and then to figure out what you know from studying biochemically one process and studying biochemically the other process. what are the pieces that connect the two?  : i think i can see, um, i think that i can see connections between things that are sometimes surprising that other people have missed them. so, they don’t feel so profound like i don’t feel as though i’m just so much smarter or whatever - that i figure things out - but i think i see connections where they might be easy to overlook - : mmm, i think because i make fewer assumptions, um, maybe that’s it. i think i make fewer assumptions, so if you - for example, in the field of rna splicing, if you make certain assumptions about the way the, um, the molecule gets spliced is made, then you would eliminate the connections with the process that comes before it or you would eliminate the connections with the process that come after it. so, i think because i don’t make as many assumptions it’s easy for me to see connections between things. does that make sense?  : mmm, mhm, mhm. : uh, that’s another really interesting question, um, i think i’ve seen people be wrong about their assumptions enough so that, um, that it’s made the concept of truth feel far less concrete. does that - that i, um, i think i’ve seen the limitations of - of um, presumed fact / : / and i’ve seen my own intellectual limitations - i’ve seen intellectual limitations of other people, so that it’s - i’ve very comfortable envisioning that there are connections that i’ve missed or maybe that have been missed in the field. : mmm  : what is it? / : agreeableness, ah. : uh huh. : -laughs- : mmm. that’s interesting. yeah. : yeah. : oh, that’s very interesting. : yeah.   : mmm. mhm, mhm.  : yeah, i think that, um, i’m really excited right now - this is maybe it’s in part because i’m just finishing the porter, but, um, i think one of the things that i’m really, really proud of is i’ve been working on a project to, um, think about what it takes to create an undergraduate curriculum that is really both challenging but also engages students to envision themselves as scientists. so, i’ve been developing this, um, it’s a whole program, but the - one of the key parts of it is a course. it's a lab course that is based on the research in my lab where students do a certain set of experiments where it's all open-ended. we don't really know what the answer is going to be. which is very different than the way we normally construct labs because you know we usually give students five samples and you know which ever one they - they have to figure out which sample they have. so it's kind of canned. everybody knows the outcome is gonna be - you kind of do a recipe. but this has been so much fun because we've starting from scratch. we've designed an experiment that students can do, but they're all freshman. they've had no exposure to research in most cases. and, um, and they are generating results that are really exciting. like things that i never would have thought that would come out of the data is coming out of it. so, um, yeah, this - i'm really, really excited about. and i think it's relates back to the - another question that - the earlier question - i think the reason why this works is because one of the - i don't assume that i'm that the students - that freshman aren't gonna be able to do this, right? the assumption is that it's not so impossibly hard that other people - that somebody coming in fresh couldn't do it and couldn't have a new set of eyes that could fundamentally impact the way we think about the research. um and to make - making the assumption that it's um or releasing the assumptions that it's so esoteric that you have to have a whole body of expertise in order to do it - um, it can - it maybe connects back to that ability to release assumptions.   : yes, yes.  : yes! and i think that that's the reason why i like research you know that there there - it is open-ended. you don't what the answer is going to be and actually depending on what you're interested in. there isn't any correct answer. um, and you, you design a good experiment then you can um get closer to understanding something but um i like the - i like the ambiguity. i like the process, and um and i think that students - we don't expose them to it that much because i think - i think in a way we are afraid that they are going to be scared away by not having the answer. but i think it's really just the opposite. you know the thing that draws a lot of us to doing research. the same thing that makes students see the beauty of, of science. : yeah, well, you say that now (laughing)  : -laughs- well, it's amazing when you - when i look at these kids, i mean, you know, they're i had them write a grant proposal, which is a little bit insane because i know you know, it's a lot of work. when i'm reading them i'm like "oh my god, why did i assign this?". but you know some of the ideas that the students are coming up with, to - the experiments that they - ways that they might interpret their results or um some of the predictions of what they might get out of some of the experiments. so they do it only half way in between, partly into the course, so they don't have results yet. so they have to speculate about what they're gonna get, and um and just come up with some brilliant ideas and so you know that's why i'm really - i'm really excited about this, because i think both scientifically it'll move in interesting directions. but i think just the sense of, of um being able to do science in a really cutting edge way i don't know - i feel like that's been really fun. : oh. : ah yes. : mmm. : yeah. : i think it connects beautifully, i think it's a perfect connection, i think it's the reason why we don't, the reason why very few, um, undergraduate labs are taught this way, besides the fact that it's a lot of work, um, for the professor and for the students but i think there is also you really do have to be comfortable guiding students through failure, and that is, that is not easy, in fact i was presenting this at um at [medical institute 1], which funds part of my research and funds this program, and um and the people in the who were uh there as part of the symposium, in the audience, one of the questions was, how - what do you do when things don't work, how do you know you are not going to have the opposite of the effect, as opposed to encouraging students to do this, that the failure is incapacitating and makes them not want to do it and that, that is a - it's certainly a risk, so far as, i don’t think it's happened / : /but it's totally a risk, but i think fear of failure is, and i have probably, i think that i'm not as afraid to fail as - i think i'm not, i assume that i'm going to fail (camera clicked) a lot and i'm not as afraid of it, -laughs- it clicked as soon as i said i'm going to fail, but i think that that probably allows a lot more freedom. : oh, um. i think in my, let's see in my professional life... um, yeah, i think in my professional life, it's probably, well, it's probably, i'm just going to give an example, i'm not going to say this was the biggest failure ever, but, i will say that um when i first started as a faculty member you know of course one of the first things that you have to do is write tons of grants, and my initial and maybe because i thought, oh okay i think i know how this works, but my first couple attempts at writing grants were epic failures, i think, really, really big failures, and i think um, in retrospect it was probably good because i know other people when they submitted their first grant you know for whatever reason that first grant got funded, and then after that it was, if the first thing didn't happen every time, it was really disorienting, and so i certainly the first grant i submitted, just, for, to the nih, was just, boy man, i think i kept the reviews as a reminder of how not to write reviews to a new assistant professor -laughs- : it was pretty brutal. : -laughs-they were total - they were spot on,  : the comments were absolutely true,  : but it was may have been phrased differently, but i think i had to think how do you deal with that, that uh that was really tough and, and i think the key thing was um, figuring out who knew the answer, who knew how to do it, who knew, who is willing to help me and who had been successful doing it and i have been really lucky to have wonderful mentors who, who, guided me through that process. : mmm, mm. i mean my parents, maybe probably everybody says this, but my parents have been, were amazing, amazing, are amazing. : so, um, my mom is, does nursing and um and care, she is a caregiver and uh my dad is in finance and banking, and um and they're both two of the most tenacious –laughs-  people i've ever known, i mean they are just, they do not give up, um, and i think that that was really instilled very early. : i'm very persistent.  : yeah, i think where i lack in ability, i make up in for in persistence  : yeah, i like that. i like that  : yeah. : yeah, mmm, i think you know for example when i first started, now this goes way way back, so there are some more recent things that i could point to, but i think this is one thing that really strikes me, when i was, um, went from 1st, kindergarten, to 1st grade,  to 2nd grade i have a very clear memory of being in a school where um even as a little kid i knew that this school was not cutting it, it was not up to par, um, and i think i knew that because it just felt like the expectations of the school were so much lower than the expectations that i was growing up with, like the expectations at home/ :  / and so when my family moved to an area where the schools were better, um, in - in around, 2nd and 3rd grade, it was really rough, it was as if i had been hit by a truck academically um but my parents wouldn't let me go into any of the courses that were not um accelerated, and so , i mean even as a – even as a little kid it was very clear to me that what i was lacking in ability, i was going to have to make up for in persistence, and, and i think that that was a really great early step, i think that was really transformative, because then i could, i figured out, i figured out i could do it if i worked hard enough that it was possible, um... : mhm, mhm. : yeah, absolutely. i have, um, i've been, i've been really lucky to have great, great teachers and mentors all throughout my education. i've had really amazing teachers and professors, including professors who, you know i started off actually as a literature major in college, or in, i was you know um and i've, i was not convinced that i was going to be a scientist, i - we had to take science courses, because it was a school - it was a college that had a um philosophy of broad education, but i didn't see myself as a scientist, initially. and i had a couple of very specific professors who took, who saw something and said you really should consider pursuing this because i think you have the talent for it. and so had they not been so encouraging, it's not clear to me that i would be a scientist now. and my first lab experience was with someone who did the same thing. i changed majors, i was a biochemistry major and then i had a lab position and this one professor said i think that you have a talent for this and i think that you should have an independent project. so he gave me an independent project, as a you know i guess i was a sophomore and it was so much fun. and it was, it was independent, it was, he gave me autonomy, but i was under guidance of graduate students, who were really also very supportive. so um i feel like i've been extremely lucky to have people who have been very um observant and what they observed, it's still not always clear to me, but whatever they observed they nurtured it, and um and then that was i guess the rest ends up being my own history, but yeah - : mmm, mhm, um not to be afraid to fail because no good experiment - no good science comes from not doing something that fails. um, working through the failure. um, and i think enjoying the process. so, if in research, if the goal is some outcome, is some set of results, is some paper or publication or whatever. if that is the goal, then that's hard to sustain because there are a lot things that don’t work. but if the process is fun, then the other part often comes... that if you know what i mean. so, for example, um, for me, what i, the most fun in my job the most fun hands down is when we're developing a model of how something works. and like we get a set of results, they really don't make sense, and so we start brainstorming about sort of what would explain this, what kind of molecular model can we envision and we kind of draw it out and go back and read the literature that may connect to concepts together, and then come back and revise the model and then design experiments that can test it. because all molecular biology is is a set of tools to that one can use to look at things that are usually too small to see or too fast to observe or - and so you have to sort of use these tricks to, um, to make, you know, i don't know make mother nature reveal herself. : and those are the, those tricks are, i think are what makes it really fun, but it starts with you know the model that then you can test so i love building models with the people, i have a great group of students and post-docs that i work with, and that's the most fun part.  : mhm, mhm, mhm, mhm.  : yeah, uh, a little of all of that. yeah. there's, you know, you collect data. you have to collect data in order to build a model and then revise it and um, and what i find very helpful is to sort of kind of draw it out. even if there are um you know flow diagrams of equations or um or you know representing molecules as you know circles and squares and then how things might fit together, and then what happens if something inhibits a reaction, what does it have as a down stream result. you know sometimes it just putting it down on paper and um you know confining these questions to a three dimensional - you know three dimensional space, um... anyway, i think that i find that that is really helpful. i'll give you an example.  : so, this is. for instance, this is a project that we were working on for - this is a paper that just got published that i am really, really proud of. so, this is kind of this picture shows - was scribbled on, like the back of a notepad / : / you know that we've gotta figure out how we can go from this to this and in the end these experiments that are part of the paper all build to this picture, but this is kind of where we started in order to figure out what the experiments were gonna be. so, this is what i mean by you know these are molecules, molecules don't even / : / look like that but it's been very informative to have a picture then to work back from.  : sure, sure, alright yeah, we just got them in the mail, so it's perfect. : yeah, yeah that would be cool.  : oh wow.  : no, no. : oh, that's cool.  : oh, what does getting it out mean? : yeah, yeah, yeah.  : yeah, i - that’s - so my answer is super contradictory because i love putting things out and talking about them. that's why i said having people,  i could never be a person whose there's just me. i love having a lab because, you know, um, if i'm thinking about something or i'm writing something, sometimes i'll wake up and i'll write it, i'll send an email, (camera click) you know so i don't forget, and the next morning people in my lab will be like "thanks for the email at 2 in the morning." but, so i feel like i really like getting things out and tossing ideas around. um and i also like talking about work, even if it's not published. i mean i have a tendency to want to talk about it more than to hold things back because i feel like i learn a lot and i assume that other people are thinking about aspects about it in ways that i haven't thought about it. so, i really like the process of getting things out there. that said, here's why i think - what i mean by contradiction. i get very – um,  i have,  it's not easy for me to publish because i'm always thinking that there's more to the story that i need to put together. um, and so, when i was first starting, my assistant professor twelve years ago, one of my mentors, said that you have to be comfortable with base hits. you can't always be looking for home runs, which was very good and very, very important advice. um, so, that's what i mean by it's a little bit of a contradiction because the number of products out there in the term – in the currency of my field are publications. the number of those products out there, i don't think is necessarily reflective of how much i like to get ideas out of my head and into a more public space. either with students or with other people in my field. and i think i've been very fortunate to be in a field where it's competitive, certainly, but there's also a level of deep respect for people and so i'm in a research area where people are far less likely to jump on each other's ideas and try to publish them before someone else does. so, there's this, i even feel like i've had the luxury of massaging ideas with colleagues and friends more than some people in fields where it's more - where there isn't that ethic. : oh interesting.  : oh, interesting yeah / : yeah, i -  i don't know that i have a good answer to that,  you mean, for myself, how readily do i break out of habits? : yeah, that's interesting. yeah, i think i would say..  i'm not sure that i would categorize myself as being sort of free-flowing open minded. when it comes to, you know, scientific ideas, i think i'm much more...  i'm pretty evidence driven. and so, in a way,  that feels a little bit more like the second part of your explanation where holding off certain kind of ideas until there's evidence to help to structure those ideas,  i think that is probably a better description of what my scientific process would be at least. : oh, i think that for - um...  i think i'm much more likely to hold onto something when it's clear to me why it's useful. i, like for example, i've never been good at trivia. like trivia games, you do not want me on your team, because if there hasn't been something to constrain that information - or not constrain,  but sort of plant that information,  i just don't find, i just don’t find it. my brain doesn't hold onto it. so, i don't know if that relates to working memory. but, i know that there are some people who have all of these bits in their memory bank that when it's necessary, they can pull it and pull those pieces together. i find that i'm building a lot when there's an idea or when there's something,  and there are some things that i can obviously remember that i can bring into it, but there are probably a lot of other things that i sort of,  i like this idea of prostheses, that felt familiar. yeah. -laughs- : -laughs- hmm... i find that, um, you know i think that what one thinks about creativity is that it often feels like implicit in that in that there's a very individual aspect of it. in other words that an individual has some sort of internal capacity that then allows them to be creative. and i feel like a lot of my, of what i find the most creative things that i do are coming from seeing things and what other people are doing. seeing - maybe it goes back to our original conversation about this, but being able to synthesize and create something new from the synthesis. and, that -  if i think about somebody like, you know, the drummer for the police or some amazing person who, you know - or an artist, i don't know. yeah, i'm sort of thinking about some artists who do work that i find interesting. sort of,  jackson pollock like there's something that you might imagine that there's something inside him that comes out and you see it in this creative representation and i feel like i'm different in that i'm,  my creativity is the ability to sort of synthesize pieces of things and put them together in ways that are different to me. or that resonate with me. is that even -  are those two things different? i mean jackson pollock i'm sure got a lot of influence from other people but it's - : i don't know if i'm a master at it. -laughs-  : but it is fun. : well i will tell you one of the things i was warning kendra about when we talked is when i was worried that i had completely messed up your entire experiment because i misunderstood the questions when i was giving the explanation. and so -  yeah,  i didn’t realize there were some questions in which i was supposed to be thinking about what an object's literal function / : /yeah, the typical / : yeah, i don't know what i did. i left and i went home and i was like oh no! i don’t know what -  because as i was there, when i finally realized what i was doing wrong or how i was misinterpreting what i was supposed to do i was like, well - : ya, well, or not a good listener. that's another possibility.  : yes : oh thank you for the opportunity to partici - uh participate, it's fun. : no i haven't done the scanning, i kinda missed - i did not know there was a deadline by the end of april, but i was kind of preoccupied that month. : okay. : okay so more resolution. : nice. : -laugh- : okay : okay : okay : hm this is cool,  : i might just take a picture of it, : -inaudible- book to read, and also look forward to your publication. : -laugh- : free-range humans, ok. : -laugh- : the statistics right? : that's interesting, so i guess for us with a resume it's easier, right? you kind of look at the awards, publications, but what about for the general public, how do you identify those individuals to participate? : uh huh : oh okay : i see. : -laugh- : what am i the most proud? like in the work i do, or? : um, i think it's identify a key problem that intrigues me but also um – and also finding solution to address that. : so when i first started as a student i umm that was this just starting of this field called neuroscience and nanomaterials. and –incomprehensible, 5:10- it was still a big challenges how to put these teeny tiny blocks in place, right because it's not like you can take your fingers, grab them and then align them. so you need to find the right way to assemble these materials into ordinary structures. so our group was making what's called a nanowires. like it's like spaghettis (?) but really like thinner, a thousand times thinner than our - our hair. so how do you arrange them into useful structure and make nanocircuits out of that. um so my advisor gave me the project that was also a big challenge, so, i actually looked into literature and also talked to the researchers from other group and identifying what are the possible ways to do it. so what i did was i taked the microfluidics, so that's what generally what people studying microfluid (?, ~6:03) -mechanics use because generates luminiferous (?, 6:06), so i think about deroxying the river, so if you're front-loxed down the river they are all aligned in the whole direction. i thought oh maybe i can use this because –inaudible, 6:17- is universal in the channel, so if i can throw those teeny tiny wires down this tiny river maybe that'd do the same thing, and so it indeed worked.  : so then i - so we were able to align those tiny wires and assemble them into circuits, and we also demonstrated diverse logic circuits making all of this tiny wires\ : \so that was uh very fun. and yeah. : the thing is it's very keen observation and also imagination i think. umm so what i was doing there - what i found is - whatever - so the wires i use are dispersed in solutions, so when i cast it on the substrate i do see random like entangled, whereas at the center of the substrate but at the edges they usually align. and so i was wondering why, so when i looked into papers and literatures and there were things talking about coffee rings, right? : coffee rings : so you drop a coffee and when they were trying they had to have a capillary force, so when you look into the edge of the coffee ring, the things that's mostly aligned. so i think it might be the force of the flow, and then i tried to look into what can give me the controlled flow. so then i can use to control the alignment, so that's basically - i guess experience and playing close attention to things around you and also uh you can imagine, whether you can use this or not and not - seeing out of the box. and people use magnetic force, electronic field, and those are more controlled and and and i guess it's easier to manipulate or it's kind of typically what people were using in the field. 
interviewer: i see, right, right.: but uh, yeah.  : yes, it's also much easier\ : yes yes. and when you're delayed too you're seeing it in everyday life, where in not just focusing on it in the lab, i think that also helps. i guess um broad experience, cross discipling, the use of field - another field's knowledge attack a problem that's in another field. i think that sometimes works out surprisingly well.  : yes yes, that's what i do my research when i started my independent career here and that's what we do. we usually borrow knowledge from another field and try to solve a problem that we are seeing in our research. : no, no, it's basically - it's it's - i guess it just came to me so umm, i - i had uh – so i guess what i did on purpose is i did read across fields and that also uh when i'm graduating from my ph.d. studies, i went into a field that's entirely irrelevant, so i go from like physical chemistry all the way to bio and um materials. i think you need to kind of know and you need to be curious -laugh- and uh think about – think about - i guess what umm... what relevance can you make.  : it's also the relevance of the work and ...i guess materials it's in the position - i guess chemistry too - i'm trained as a chemist, umm so it's relevant because i am kind of working with solid-state chemistry and solid-state all - you can call it material chemistry anyways or more or less synthesis. and materials is more connecting fundamentals all the way to application and there are a lot of things you can explore on the way. so you can start from very fundamental bits and then push it all the way to like the real-world applications to solve problems and i think that's\  : \what's very interesting. i like the whole scope of it, but of course i like more of exploring at the bottom. but we can find umm ways to solve problems and hand the product to others to kind of mature it into - into a real-world device. : right right, because it's a lot of engineering and optimization of it there and that's a little bit out of my um interest realm -laugh- : yes i like the things that you need to find out how, how it works, not just making work. : or, or yeah.  : umm so when i started my career here, i wanted really to find out about how a biomolecule can interact with the specifics of -inaudible, 11:48- material. and that has been very hard, umm so i think when we started we don't know whether it's going to be successful or not. umm so i think these is not sure how i define obstacles. i think then it probably perseverance and - and then you need to believe that it can work and if you're curious enough, you work hard, and you of course - you have the right student, it's going to work -laugh-. : and so out of faith umm...umm... perseverance and also thinking out of the box. so i'm from china, so there's a phrase in china, "*tashan gishucuy com", so that means if you take just a rough stone from another mountain, it might be able to crack the jade in this mountain. so that's a kind of saying of cross disciplinary work, how it works. so there may be this piece of information that's lying there um for a while but nobody uses it to attempt real problems that others are experiencing. so it's still doing that.  : (laughing) : yes so the china phrase tashan gishucuy com, tashan gishucuy com. so the mountain - the rock from the other mountain\ : -laughing- : so in my work is i wanted to find students, of course highly self-motivated and also have the same interests and curiosity as you do. so um each student is different, right. some are very practical, they want to make things that work, which is great. um but when i'm working on a really difficult project, i want students to have the same curiosity. you know, so he or she might have the internal drive to solve problems, to understand what is really going on. because they are the actual ones where are experimentalists, so they are actually the ones that's working the lab, making the observation. i meet with them frequently so i see their data and we talk about what this might mean and those things. so the student i think that might be able to work with me, or work with any other professor's on really difficult or fundamental problems need to have curiosity, motivation, keen observation as well. because if they were not able to observe the difference, right, they are seeing it daily, there might be something very important.  : you don't at the beginning -laughing-. actually you give them a project to work on, you can kind of see the trades are start to – to - to emerge, right. some students are very uh driven, they are, "oh i think this might be happening", and they will go and do experiments to prove and without being total, "i need this two days later", they will usually come to me earlier than i expected and bring that results. um, that's - that's more than i expected. so i think curiosity, scientific curiosity is very important. : umm so i - i've always been very uh into natural science since i'm young. umm because i wanted to know how things work, so i guess eventually how to uhh... develop i guess, in terms of career paths umm. my -inaudible, 15:56- advisor -inaudible, 15:58- and he's very creative, he was um also a chemist with a degree in electrochemistry, and then he made a bold change to semi - um super-conducting materials and um each change he turned out to be very successful. he also worked very hard, he's not afraid to make a move, and when i joined the group he actually just kind of moved from superconductor materials to nano-structure materials. and and yeah, i guess be bold -laugh- but also be critical.  : so that's what i learned from him and i think that has been very helpful. : definitely curiosity. you know, very interested in finding out how things work, and that i think i have to be interested and enjoy doing that, and perseverance. so in this field or this profession, you need to have a strong -laugh, coughing- confidence in yourself in what you do to carry on because not everything is smooth\ : \at all. : yes, yes i'll give - usually be curious, be critical, and uh be persistent.  : um well, i – i\ : oh certainly, certainly. well we got rejections every single day, so. -laughing- you need to have a strong confidence um to carry on some the work that you trust is going to make an impact, or just you think it is very interesting work that we're spending time and efforts on. : um : no my parents are - they are not that type control type of parents, so they just let me do whatever i want, and i think uh that might help. they are not asking me to go this way or the other. : it's always that way. : right, right.  : i don't. i grew up as a single child. : so i think that might help because i'm usually bored -laugh- by myself, and i read and i'm currently into this -inaudible, 18:37- i'm kinda into this supernatural phenomenons and we read books, and i'm interested in learning how things are in other parts of the world. so um by myself i was read - read uh quite some books when i was young.  : yes, when i was growing up, like elementary school, middle school, and growing up, yup.  : hmm? : -laughing- : uh yes, grade wise certainly always top in the class.  : that's what – kinda the expectation of china parents anyway. i think that's part of the reason they let me along because i wasn't failing any grades or whatsoever. -laugh- : uh... not necessarily um. so - so i think it's because uh when i was growing up in china, grades a lot of things. and they actually - it's kind of the primary focus for most of the teachers, -inaudible, 19:52- your grades. so i did get like straight a grades if you put it that way throughout my school years. and so they would pull me into different focus groups either for math, or for physics, or for chemistry, biology. umm but i was taking a keen interest in - in plants, like biology, when i was uh uh younger. and that biology teacher was um - i really like him, he's very good in what he was doing and he's also very good at poetry, a poet. he's very interested in i think things that's not science at all. i guess that might have a influence uh on me and also on the group of kids they loved to hang out with him. so we'd talk about things, certainly we'll talk about biology that's you know related to the subject, oh we'll also talk about different things and enjoy doing that. and he also plays music and and\ : i don't i don't. -laughing- : no i don't, but i do enjoy reading uh uh poems. i guess that part was his uh uh influence, either china classical poems or some of the more modern ones that’s of the china poems - poets, and we'd talk about different things uh that's out of the science field.  : and we did enjoy that process. : i learned - we started classes in the elementary school. i think it's either the fourth grade or the third grade. : oh chinese. -laughing- : okay : oh okay. i haven't - i haven't thought about that. uh the - i can tell you what i do in terms of understanding things or - i do – what i learned before during my different interest is chinese caricatures more like uh arch, right? you write like drawing a picture. : and for me visually stimulus definitely leave a long lasting or longer lasting impression on me. so when i'm reading a paper i always start with the pictures, the figures. so to me, 3d image or figure means a thousand word -laugh-.  : i can easily grasp something from the figures and and read through - reading is fine. what i don't really do well is listening, auditory, whatever that. so when people say something more complicated to me, take me a little bit longer time to process. that's what i notice of myself. i'm not sure it has anything to do with you know reading chinese or learning chinese uh has anything to do with these kinds of things or just individuals, but that’s. : okay : -laugh- it might be true. : longer. : i believe so, yes. : because when i see a name, like if you give me a card, a id card or business card, the name stay with me longer. but if you just tell me your name, like talk, i forget about it fairly easily. i can still kind of know the face, right? i cannot make connection to names if i don't make that connection right there with the name written on the card and the face right there. -laugh-  : or it's kind of, i don't know whether it's related but. : yes i am right handed. : everything. : um no, no. but i do - if i jump on single leg, it's left. : but hand, definitely right handed. -laugh- : i guess it's it's different cases. for work definitely we have to do - have to be very rational, um but sometimes it's more - also the observation and in terms of some ideas come to my mind as more intu - intuition. so i would say sometimes important discoveries will be when you're reading and then you have this intuition or idea that came to mind, it will be followed up by rational process because as a scientist you always need to double check whether this is true, but when i am out shopping or looking at things i don't, i'm not that rational at all -laughing-\ : \, so. : uh... no not really, i think that that to me it is a relaxing process, so i just want to do things without too much of thinking sometimes with is not related to work or other things. so to me i just think relax- it's just a relaxing state.  : i think so, so if i move away from my current focus, either work or family, and just go out and sometimes do nothing right, break out, and i think it it uh broad - in a broad sense give me a better perspective of life. because um i think that was just one of the processes that i need to keep my life balanced -laugh- : uh i think i prefer by myself at least when i'm uh formulating an idea. i um - but i after this is more or less set, i know kind of what i'm after, so i go talk and work with people. and i usually in forming the idea of project, i prefer to - so i don't randomly uh, i'm not sure. i think my preference is to work on my own for a while and then go talk to people.  : okay : um so i think it's possibly - in our career everything needs to be proofed. so in terms of having an idea, i would like it to be tested in the experimental setting right away. um so about getting out to the public, um i guess in our career anyway - in our world anyway, it means you have solid proof of your ideas, you kind of - it's well developed and then you publish it. um... so... sometimes i do. like when i have a idea, i saw that it might - this problem might be solved by certain approach, i'll do some of the research myself and then go talk to others. so you count that as as premature kind of dissemination. : uh no, i think in terms of writing i would - the incubation period is longer because i cannot have a - a flaw in my mind. so if i'm not sure, like what are the highlight points, i usually don't sit down and write. um so when i started writing i still go to drafts - go through a different draft, but i don't think it's as many as maybe other typical people are. so yeah, i did notice the difference in my husband, he's also a scientist. he would just put down everything on the paper and then he'd go over everything on the paper. : right right right, yes. right right, i still do that. : yes yes i\ : \yes i pretty much have a – kind of what i want to say. : um, and i - and i - i - i cannot explain, he delete. -laugh- : um no i - uh not really. uh it's - well everything routine is is with kids really. their school time, their off-school time, their after-school activities. : uh uh beyond that i'm pretty pretty fluid. it's just i don't have a - i'm not a good planner, so. : no. : uhh... i guess we don't have - we don't make many plans i guess that - that's... so even for my kids they have very - well it's just um some parents will have like you need to do one hour of homework this and that but i was never - it's never like that for in my family. so they get up, go to school and i ask them to finish what they are - what they need to do and then the rest of time is up to them. so i'm not very structured. you can put it that way. : umm ten and seven, i have two girls.  : and the first grade, she just turned six-seven. : they're doing well in school, they're fine. : they like it, they like - they went to [school 1]. : yeah? : are they still there, or? : -laugh- oh okay, yeah they love the school.  : right, -laughing- i guess that's a good fit. : having a lack of control is necessary um especially uh when we were doing experiments, i cannot name a specific project right now but uh sometimes you were run into this obstacle that you know there's an existing problem uh you can never solve, right? it's like you've tested a million things um but nothing worked. i think - now then you know it would be a great time for you to to um break the pattern and seeing what might or might not go wrong in the process and what might be the reason. um so that will require you to be inhibited, you need to break away from the usual suspects and try to look into possible ways of doing your – doing your experiment and things like that. um so also when i give my student a project or when i initiated a project as a student myself, we have a big direction. we know that you know say well i want to do assembly of things, i want to figure out how biomolecules grow materials, uh but i won't tell them what method to use, so i don't give them like, "this is how it works," or i usually tell them this is the direction, go, this is the stop point, but you need to be able to navigate through the project by your results. so basically they look at what they get from each set and try to navigate through things. umm and... i guess if you're pretty tuned to creativity, what we felt - i guess this is came from conversation in the field, like many younger uh professors or faculty members we often felt um -inaudible, 36:19-, what is inhibiting the most creativity of our career in our profession is the available funding. so that's the freedom -laugh-. so if you don't have that kind of financial freedom, i do believe yes you are inhibited in a certain way right because there are um short term projects that the agencies are going to fund, that they - yes they give me a direction, "this is what we want", um but that's shorter term. and that's not very good for creativity and also that's not very good for fundamental science. so i think financial freedom i guess is possibly one of the inhibiting factors in terms of doing science. : get more funding. : -laughing- if that can happen i think that will be the best, it will be the best for our profession, so then you have the freedom to just go after the problems that you think are most –inaudible, 37:23- or most important. : rather than have to deal with this routine you know. inhibitors are writing reports, specificate this way that way. : um but yup. so will we\  : good -laughing- : right right i think that's\ : inc.? : ed camel : cool. : that's true. : definitely true. yeah i think that's umm - if you have the freedom to fail and not the fear to fail i think that's very very important.  : ocean : i think so uh i kind of, in my dictionary i kind of put agreeable - maybe my dictionary was not that right, to openness. so open to discussion, you're open to critique right, when people say, "this is not." i think disagreeable is probably relate back to what i say about uh confidence and perseverance. so if you do - if you do trust and this is going to work and you have the love, the passion to achieve it, and i don't think you should give up at all. just face um you know the quote from some - i don’t know - uh from - or the objections or any comments you receive from the reviewers or referees, i think that's definitely really important at least in - as a scientist, just standing your ground. : you mean thinking process or? : hm... think to... i've set many things, umm... so definitely to be open minded. i think that actually set a lot of things, you're open to other people's opinions, what they are doing is really inspiring, and also like borrowing techniques in our case from the other field, like from bio to apply to physics or to apply to chemistry or materials. so i think open minded uh is very important.  : thank you for your time. : that's the question that i ask my... when i interview grad students. yeah, that's the exact question. i wouldn’t say limited to works, i would say what is the one thing you are the most proud of in your life that you've done. there a couple of things i’ve done- there was a problem that was outstanding for about 40-50 years in my field, i solved it because i didn’t know that it couldn’t be solved. i came at it from a different angle to view it. i think that was good and that's one of the things that i've been credited for and it's no longer with my name and all those things so it's just.... so that's one thing. the other thing... can i give you more than one?  : so that was good because, you know, i wasn’t afraid of it and i went into it and i did it very different way from other people, so that was nice. the other thing was a project i had to do during undergrad, so i was procrastinating completely so i had a project that i had to do for it, final, kinda like a senior level lab, and it was the night before the exam... before it was due and it was something that had to be built, so it's not something i had to write, it was something that had to be entirely built and worked. so, i got into my car and drove to an electronic store. in my mind, i designed the entire thing and went and bought the parts, put them together, and it worked. so i was proud of that because it was a minor thing but i'm proud of it because i did the entire process in my head before i... : it was a... it's called a tdr, time-division reflectant. it was a way of generating pulses and sending it through a line and looking at what comes back and based on that, determining what’s, let's say a piece of wire or phone line or optical fiber line or something like that. it was pretty trivial... oh wait it wasn't... it was a decently and rather complex thing to build so... anyway. but yeah, so those are the two. but if i were to pick one, i would pick the first one.  : right, yeah. it's a design, so there are so many ways to do it. there's not just one way to do it.  : i made it yeah, while i was driving. : what i think – well, this is my view on creativity based on what i've seen and what i've done. my view is that it’s the ability to connect seemingly unrelated things in a useful or interesting way. and to be able to connect seemingly unrelated things on the fly, you have to have a certain number of them on your mind, otherwise it's difficult to connect things that you don't remember. so, memory is a part of it, but there are different kinds of memory. if i ask you to remember a, you know 20 digit number, that's a different kind from concept, which i think mental level, higher level of abstraction, if you think about it, if i ask you to memorize a phrase or a passage, that's a higher level than just remembering disparate numbers. but, the next level is the connection and the next level is an underlying concept that is common to all of them and remembering those underlying concepts and the way... they are abstract from all of the observations that you had and being able to connect them to other things you have seen i think is very important to creativity. a lot of creative things that i consider that i have done, i have a fair number of inventions and all of those things, came from the fact that it's related to something i read someplace when i was a teenager or in some random book i was just looking at and i was just curious about and reading, so had nothing to do with things i had learned in a classical environment. so i think, just going back to i gave a long-winded answer to your question, but i think since it's... in my mind... it's the ability to connect these seemingly unrelated things. the more of these seemingly unrelated things you can keep in your mind in an abstract enough fashion so that it's general enough.  : it partly goes to my personality, which i think goes back to our upbringings, in a way and the environment we grew up in. and all of that is why i personally think  creativity is probably not all genetic, but a fair amount of... you know...acquired element. but, i had a plenty of free time as a child, i had an incredible amount of free time. so my parents were both professionals and they both worked and i had a nanny who stayed with me. i didn't have a sibling for, i mean i have a younger brother who is 6 years younger than me, so when i was growing up, he wasn't there. i was at home with my nanny. they tried to put me into daycare but i refused and i resisted. i'm pretty stubborn too so i think that helped... and hurt. but, so basically i had a nanny who was providing me with the basics needs, food you know and taking care of the basic stuff but other than that i was free to do whatever i wanted to do during the day, most of the day, before i got to school. i think that was very important, you know, because you go and get to the bottom of things and you learn to entertain yourself with things that are not supposed to be entertaining and in that process you learn more and more about the subtleties about the most mundane things if you look at them.  : let me give you an example. i mean this is not all i did, but... so i'll give you a couple of examples. dirt is very interesting. if you go in and look into it and see what is inside of it from a structural perspective, try to build things with dirt or sand. there's plenty of interesting stuff you look at if carefully. or try to build things that you don't have. if you try to... if you want something, there's a lot of ways of making it... another way of getting it, which is making it. i think that free time is something i wish children had more of today and unfortunately they don't.  it's very, very important because it allows you to connect things that are not supposed to be connected. it forces you to do that. and i think if there's a genetic element, then it definitely enhances it and if there isn't, you could generate it... i don't know if there is. i mean intelligence, i buy... i completely agree that there is a genetic element... and you're the expert, i shouldn’t be telling you these things. but again, from my perspective, i think there's that element of the classic iq aspect of things, that's pretty.... there's a strong genetic element, but creativity... i don’t know. so, going back to your question, what made me able to go back and solve that problem partly was that willingness to connect the things that were not supposed to be relevant and part of it was just being stubborn and trying to prove other people wrong. or, antagonistic you might call it.  : that makes perfect sense because if you’re satisfied with the status quo there is no reason to change it. : projects or turning points... i'm just trying to make sure... : well, there are several turning points... my second grade teacher was particularly interesting because... this is a fluke of nature and fluke of the time... i am originally from iran and i grew up in iran and i came to the us for grad school and my second... the revolution happened between my first grade and second grade, so... second grade it was turmoil, so just right after the revolutions and it's one of those things that make you experience interesting times, kind of... but anyway, so through a combination of circumstances, my second grade teacher was gone for about a month and before she went away, she put me in charge of the class. so, i was in charge of a second grader... i mean i was a good student but she put me in charge of a class for about a month and i managed it... and... so that gave me the confidence that you can do things. it wasn't bad... nothing fell apart. we were covering the material and... so that's an example... : no. we had our textbooks, so i basically just went over the textbooks... : yes... : i mean... i didn't do that, but they weren't hating me after the process when she came back, so i suppose that... : yeah, so that's an example. basically, it's your upbringing and background and the situations you're exposed to sometimes forces you to improvise, and that process is something that, like everything else, once you practice more, you get better at.  : absolutely. my parents were both educated, and they were both professionals so they gave me a lot of latitude with things that i could do. the latitude they gave me was very useful in terms of being able to... i mean of course the classic things reading to you and talking to you and discussing things and bringing it up, of course that's useful, but also the latitude to try things that i wanted to do. so that is another example, but coming to more recent times, i think there's a bunch of different things. i'll tell you one more thing. i think one thing that pushes people forward is some level of insecurity.  it's not particularly conducive to being extremely productive if you are super secure, that's my opinion. i see a ,lot... i see grad students... i work with grad and undergrad students all the time. i mean, like yourself... and one thing i've noticed is that people are not as hungry as they should be and when they're not as hungry... i mean i don't mean it literally obviously... just figurative... but, incentive... there's no draw... hungry doesn’t necessarily mean you need it, but you are hungry for going beyond where you have been or where everyone else has been. you know, the mother of invention, right. : and insecurity. at the end of the day, trying to prove yourself at some level that's... : right, exactly... good to have some baseline of securities... : once it becomes an existential thing, then it completely goes the other direction, right? what i mean, i think you hit the nail on the head exactly, it has to be the right amount at this level that nothing drastic is going to happen, but, you know, if i want to take it to the next level, what do i need to do? : i’ve always been very curious, generally speaking, you know. when i look back at it, i've always been vey very curious. what drives me the most is learning about new things and finding out whether or not certain things can be done. so, i'm a designer, i make stuff so in that sense... that is a challenge but in terms of what drives me to take it to the next level is basically i want to see how far it can go. it's... but at the end of the day we all have all these like...our egos right, which drives us and, you know like to think that we're good so we have a self image we have to maintain, right?  : there are always times when you think about... and the self image... there are different ways of having a self image. there are completely unrealistic ways of having a self image. one can have an unrealistic self image where you think that you are the greatest person ever having set foot on this planet is extraordinary about you. but a realistic one is based in facts and that constantly adjusts itself and becomes more sophisticated, more complicated, in the sense that there's multi-faceted thing. you realize as you grow up you're good at certain things and you're not good at certain other things, so it's a struggle always to try to better yourself. i know i'm talking philosophically and very high level, but... : okay, i'm good at coming up with new things that are useful, but that process requires coming up with a lot of new things that are not useful. so the creativities a tree, well at least in my field, what i do. i think about... i'm going to answer your question but going to preface it with something else. so, in my mind there are two trees: there's a top down tree and a bottom up tree of things when you want to create something. i'm not talking about a work of art, i mean i like to paint in my free time and things like that, that's less constrained. let's say i'm trying to create a new thing. so, there are needs in the society, right. there are things that would be dine to have but we don't have. so, that's a top down tree. so you say, if i wanted to have a flying car that's useful for everyone, just for an example. a device that can read your mind, right? things like that. so, you kind of have to break it down, that's what i say by top down. if i want to have a flying car i need this, i need this element, i need a lightweight engine that has enough thrust, i need to have this composite material that can do that. i have to have the mechanisms so that it can take off... so you break it into 3 or 4 key ingredients and you can break those into smaller and smaller ingredients and you may have some of them and you may not have some of them. and until you have all of them or an alternative to all of them, you can't make it. so that's a top down tree. there's a bottom up tree which there are basically a phenomenon of things in the nature that we discover that goes back to curiosity. so you find out that oh this material has this very interesting property, you haven't thought about how to use it. it's just some things. well, what can i do with this? right? what can i make with this if i know this, for example, fake diamond has this optical property, what other thing... hmm this is interesting it does this and that... hmm... what can i use it for? so, i can say, oh i can do this, i can do that... but i try to have this bottom up tree and top down tree and these trees meet at some point, the bottom up and top down. and this point of connections is important to identify. once you identify this point of connection, you can use some of these underlying, enabling things in the world around you to the things there's need for. the ability to identify these connection points relies on having a good understanding of that top down tree and a good understanding of that bottom up tree and where the branches are so you can see where the branches meet. i'm good at that. so, that's one way to answer your question. and, i think i'm also good at identifying what people's capabilities and abilities are that work with me to assign them to the right... to focus on the things that's right for them. but, yeah i mean i think it's just the ability to connect these things goes back to an earlier conversation we had about memory and being able to... that kind of memory, knowing these concept... because there's lots of bottom up trees like you're in a forest. there's different things that can do different things and do you remember how... yeah i remember i saw, i played with this thing 25 years ago, 30 years ago that did this interesting thing and i have this problem now so maybe if i can use a variation of that here... : so, that goes back to the abstraction and generalization, right? there are lots of seemingly unrelated things but most of them are governed by few principles of nature, right? i mean if you think about it, you can call it physics or science or that sort of... and many of these things once you understand the underlying principles and what are the unique characteristics that they can generate, you can abstract them away and reduce the number. and, even with... it's basically pretty much i can tell you there are different views of that and they are oversimplifications but let me just give you an example of how that can be done. in an extreme case, and in a real case they are much more complex than that, is that everything you see around you, everything that you experience, everything that is happening in this office, with the exception of gravity, is a manifestation of one law of nature which is the electromagnetics force, chemistry, biology, everything that's happening, electricity, the fact that the materials behave in certain ways, everything. other than gravity, other than things falling down, everything's a manifestation of that, so... : well, more or less we have. : no, well the gravity and that, yeah. but, we don't need to solve. so... you can think about those two trees. : no, exactly. we still have time, right. but, so that's the thing. but, of course that's extreme. but, there are many common threads to things, so when you see the... when you identify those common threads... in my mind they are in all of the engineering, in all of the inventions. i think there are... in all of the science and engineering, there are probably 20 unique ideas, concepts, and everything else are sort of offshoots of that. but, it's kind of like that. i was observing my children when they were learning numbers and colors, so that was very interesting. so, when my daughter... she was learning the colors. so it was a 3 or 4 step process. if i'm going off a tangent, feel free to stop me. so, the first step was that when i asked what color is something, everything, i think in her case, everything was green. she thought that, so this is a regular question. what is your name, what color is this? the answer is green. i said, no this is orange, this is red. so, then she got confused. so, the next step was that she would throw out this random color name and that was okay. the third step, which was interesting to me, was basically at some point she had memorized the colors of objects we had commonly asked her about. so, i showed her one of her common toys, she would know that the answer for this object is green and the answer for this object is orange, for this one is red. the way you know this is you take a new object that she didn't know about and she would give you the random color name. i think i witnessed the moment when all this seemingly unrelated pieces of information collapsed, because she was playing with these toys and i said, well let's put all of the greens together and the reds together, and she was like very small, and then she looked at them for second and then you can see that entire body of knowledge collapsing into simple generalizations. oh, this is what green is, and then it was gone. the same thing happened with numbers. i noticed that, at least my children, learned the numbers the following way; it was 1 and many. what you know if it's 1, you get the correct answer, if it's more than 1, you would get a random number. then, it became 1, 2, and many, and then it became 1, 2, 3, and many. and then, after that, they had 3 points so they could extrapolate and see the pattern. so anyway, going back to that question... we have gone two levels deep so i have to back two levels... um, so going back to that question is that yes, there are multiple trees but there aren’t that many bottom up trees. : i can name them, yeah. i have written them down for myself, yeah. : yeah, maybe i should... : well, there are 20 fundamental things. i mean, they're simple. i can tell you, it's... : i can give you an example. they are not that complicated, but i can tell you where they appear. so, let me start with a simple one, leverage. levers. so, what happens is that it basically... there's a very common concept that the product of two things is constant in science. so, you have one thing you can trade with the other thing. the most basic concept of the 20 i would say... the simplest example, levers and wrenches and things of that sort, but then in electricity you have current and voltage and in all fields of physics you have anything, in chemistry you have the rate and things... so everything has this, so that's one example. another example is operating things... so, it's a timed operation of things in tandem. when you have multiple things that operate in tandem, things in synchronization, you can achieve certain properties that's common to many things. it's basically the operation of things in concept, and there are like i would say 20 of them.  : coherence is an example of that, but it's not limited to coherence.  a lot fo things operate on that principle. so, when you look at these things all together, all the same thing... different manifestations of the same abstract concept. then you have sufficiently small enough number of these bottom-up trees that are different exhibitions of what they mean that you can try to link to top-down trees. anyway, so... you asked me what am i good at? i think i'm good at finding those connections, branch points.  : i try to keep track of it so that i can come back... : if i'm digressing, at least i have to know the way back. : yeah, several of my teachers were influences on me because... : actually, she was a great teacher by the way, other than that there were circumstances out of her control and there were no other choices, so... definitely there was no negligence or... it was necessity but she was actually pretty, that level of confidence she exhibited... that was interesting. generally speaking, people who exhibit confidence in you, and you know when it's false, people really know when it's a false compliment... that's one of the problems we have today. we give our children too much... not so genuine encouragement because they are smart, they know it. and their confidence is not boosted... they just think that ok well... anyway going back to my teachers... but i think the most important thing good peers. peer group is really important. i think those are probably the ones that will... i went to this special program, school program, so this was a true meritocracy and that school had a significant influence on me. so the way it worked was that, at the time i was growing up there were no private schools. so, at that particular time period, before and after there were... so everyone went to public schools. there was a program that was sponsored by the educational system. every year they took 100 boys and 100 girls and the entrance exam was essentially an iq test and they... : oh, i see i see. you know why right? : no, i don't know about this one, but there are many of cameras that will completely... but it's a completely economical regulatory thing. any camera that records more than 30 minutes is considered a video camera taxed by a higher rate by the eu. so, a lot of these cameras that actually take... completely capable of recording for hours, but since the companies don't want to pay the extra tax and make the product less competitive in the european union... : and they don't have the ability to break them down... anyways, so going back to this question of the liberty on the subject of the school system. so, basically it happened in 6th grade... the interesting thing was that it was a true meritocracy. it was... you had very poor kids and you had very rich kids and anything in between, but nobody really paid attention to any of that. so, you had a group of people that were smart and interested in learning new things and doing new things... so that system and my peer group had significant impact on me.  : several! there were, i mean... one of the interesting things it did to me was make me realize... i mean before i went to that school, i didn't realize that there were... i don't want to sound arrogant but, there wasn't anyone that compete with me. there wasn't real competition. i didn't consider anyone... i mean not... i don't mean to sound arrogant, but there was nobody that was on the same level. so, but when i went there, i saw that there were people who were of the same and similar caliber, so it was very helpful for me so i could have more meaningful conversations. so, it's not one particular person, there was a group of them. they are actually very successful, now on facebook you can look where they are, and they're all really successful, they are in different professions, but whatever they do, they are known and well-respected in what they do. but also, we had several teachers who were idealists in terms of science is important you know... for us... sometimes they idolize some of these famous scientists and things of that sort and that makes you find a it interesting and go and pursue it. i know i gave a half answer to your question but i think that's as much as i can give right now unless you have a specific question i can... : that drives you to go to the next... : exactly, and it drives you to the next level and that happens on several levels like when i went to, for example, to college again, undergraduate level. the school i went to was the most competitive to get into and the group of people who were... they see now... there's a different group of people who are slightly different in terms of their focus and then i went to grad school, i came to the us at that time so that was a change for me. i went to [college 1] so that was also another interesting kind of change so that put you in touch with a different group of people thinking differently so that was good. and then, so again, there have been several phases of this thing so you have to up your game constantly, so... : couldn't understand... couldn't understand with putting enough effort into it or couldn't understand period? : there are things that i decide not to pursue because i don't think it's worth the effort but i don't think i... so, to give you a short answer to the first question, i don't think the answer is... i think the answer is no, i don't feel that there is anything i feel that i can't understand. there are certain things you have to make a cost benefit calculation, right? i mean certain things you just say, yes if i invest 5 years of my life i'm sure i can understand this because i look at it and this is not impossible to do, but i have other things to do right now, so you have to specialize. there are certain things you have to... yeah. i think people, ok so... let me give you a different answer to your question. i think people behave irrationally many times. and, i can't understand what's going on in their head. i can anticipate what they do. i can try to predict what they do and i can. but, it sounds to me sometimes that they, they are doing something that gains their own interest. and i don't try anymore to convince them otherwise, but i haven't been really successful of convincing them of it either, and i don't think it's my position or my place anyway. people make irrational decisions all the time. so, i think i understand why they do it, because of their background and their upbringings and just the things that they just assume to be true and it's not, but yeah. i think i... : politics is a manifestation of a lot of things that are wring because it happens on a large scale. in any society, when you look at this politics, i think it is a sign of the problem areas. it manifests itself in many different ways, but at the end of the day, politics is a good showcase. it's like pain in the bodies can be a symptom of many different things. but, politics is a good example, you know. there are people who make decisions directly against their own benefit, against their own interest right? because they believe certain dogmas...they have been indoctrinated. but, you know, as human beings i think we are quite... what's the right word... we are pretty prone to persuasion. because we are herd animals and, you know, we like to listen to authority and if someone comes in and says enough authority and enough times you tend to believe it. power of persuasion is a very important factor in being successful i think it is another one of those... you said agreeableness is one... powers of persuasion is extremely important in success because being... i mean you were very persuasive in your email because i was looking at it and okay, you know this guy knows what he is doing because he is kind of appealing to our egos and self-image at the same time... i'm saying this all as a compliment and nothing but a compliment because we all have to be persuasive... and a lot of times it is for a good cause like when we write grant proposals we have to be persuasive and when we go out and give presentations we have to be persuasive. so, again... : no, i don't think so. : i have to write these things down because know i've exceeded my bits. i'll probably send you an email asking for his name because you gave me two or three interesting pointers. i should pursue them. : i've always been interested. i read a lot of books on psychology. i read all of the classic books on, you know, young and... and there was one that is not very famous in the uc but she is very interesting... kare... : horney, yeah. she was very interesting. i read her... many of her books when i was like, i don't know 13, 14 and of course, you know, i find it interesting, generally interesting. sorry, go ahead. : it's fascinating that you brought this up because it's just like i was thinking about this just a few weeks ago. so, let me give you a couple of adjectives and then try to make sense of these... abstract them a little bit more. so, one of the things i tell my grad students when we are working... many of times we have these brainstorming sessions where we are sitting down trying to solve these problems. so, what i tell them is a little cliché but i'll let you know in this session if you generate 100 ideas and 10 of them are even worth discussing, and one of them is worth pursuing a little bit further – may or may not lead to anything – we have succeeded. so, it goes back to that generation of spewing things out and then trying to prove it later. so we do that a lot of times and in that process, it's very interesting, you see some people very quickly hit a brick wall because a lot of times we use this as an excuse that the ability that we have to constrain as an excuse to not trying to think creatively, quote unquote, and coming up with crazy ideas. so, that's one way to do it. but at the same time, there are well-defined. so, this is usually useful in the process of invention. so, there are two different processes. invention is a divergence process in my concern. so it's a creative process... and you know it doesn't matter. if i'm trying to create something and i create something else, it doesn't matter. i still get the credit for it. a lot of times, your initial objective was something completely different but the way you find something else is completely useful and that's perfectly fine. it's like painting, oh you do it differently... it came out nicely too. or, you know, poetry and things of that sort. there's another process which requires more of that convergent thinking, more of that rumination process, more of that pondering things. and that's the discovery process. so the invention and discovery are parallel things, but they are not the same. the discovery process is relevant in sciences, when you're trying to find... there's... the truth is that there is one answer. right? at least as far as hard sciences are concerned, let's say physics. there is one correct description of nature in the sense that it has to be verified with experiments and hard science is like physics and chemistry or things of that sort. so, either something happens or doesn’t. we can get into quantum mechanics and things of that sort... even that has correct descriptions. : there's a general understanding that encompasses both of them, that consumes both. so, that is the correct answer. so neither one of them, wave or particle, is correct. so, i'm saying that when you are in a situation that you're trying to discover something that already exists or understand something that already exists, then that pondering process becomes a lot more involved. that thinking and ruminating and sitting on it for ages... that may not be done by one person, that may be done by generations of people that's passed on where we are, the thought process and handing it off to the next group of people and that's where basically it becomes useful. i'm aware that sometimes scientists have and sometimes engineers have... but there are two different ways. going back to your question, when i'm trying to create things, it's more of a process of creating a lot of ideas and trying to down-select. but, if you're trying to solve a known, fixed problem, a well-defined problem, then it's really a focus, laser sharp focus, narrowing it down a nd focusing on that. : um, in my... so, in what i do, it's a constraint creativity and what do i mean by that? what i try to do, i mean not anything that i generate is useful, or even before that. so, basically, that's where this selects differently... not anything that i... i can generate a lot of crazy things, right? but, most of them are not even satisfied by the laws of nature. so, in my field, it's useless. and, many of them are not useful, even if i do that. so, it's different. because i see a lot of people... it's very interesting and exciting to watch people who are creative with these like conspiracy theories, for example. you can come up with all sorts of theories about how things happened and you talk to them and you come across a lot of people with pseudoscientific views of things and, you know, it's creative, but it's unconstrained. so, going back to the inhibitions, i think by the nature of what i do, i have to be inhibited. i have to make sure that what i say doesn't violate some obvious law of nature or it's something that clearly there is a use for or at least it's a potential use in the future or some relevance to... but, it's fun to be uninhibited and go crazy about things and as long as you realize that nothing's going to come out of it. or, not necessarily nothing's going to come out... : i think it's a discipline. i think there is, there probably is and i agree with you that there are some intrinsic elements to it, but i think it's a way of thinking and it goes back to things like the confidence in the ability to unleash it, if you will. um, i don't know if i can say anything of any profound things beyond this but if i can think of it i'll email you... : oh, yeah. the whole zoom in, zoom out... : yeah, i like to do that. i like to be able to zoom in and zoom out, it's important to be able to do that.  : uh no. : … uh, my kids. : hm... no idea. -laughter- um hard work. : -laughter- : you know - no - yeah - i mean i had to - it takes a minute to think about, like those are kinda big questions you know. : - inaudible- sort of think about it. i honestly think um, and not just because of the title of your project, but i honestly think it's because we nurture their creativity um um quite intentionally to the exclusion of other things, like to the exclusion of discipline, we nurture creativity. and uh i think that shows in what they do. : sure, yeah. we um expose them to a lot of different things, and what i mean by that is a lot of different activities, so they can find the things that they were good at and that inspire them, and a lot of different places. we took them all over the world. i mean i took my daughter to paris for the first time when she was 4. um and uh we took them to australia and we took them all over europe, and we took them – we've taken them to so many places. um so we travelled with them a great deal to expose them to a lot of different things. and they pursed - they each chose a musical instrument that they – we then - we did cultivate discipline there actually. there were two things where discipline really featured in our parenting style and that was um making them practice instruments once they - once it was their idea to do it then they had to do it. and then with respect to school work, like there was never any compromise about school. but um - but otherwise, they were involved in theater and you know, all kinds of um... things that they loved to do. and we - you know what - we didn't reward them for like - we didn't pay them an allowance to do chores.  : we paid them to accomplish things with their – with their music and stuff like that. so we would give them rewards for those kinds of accomplishments. so i think we incentivized them for both for nurturing creativity and also for achieving great\  : i think it was a pretty - a pretty intentional strategy.  : um... no. i would say... i mean my parents were not tremendous disciplinarians, they were –inaudible, 3:52- but. we had more - we had more in a way of like chores and things like that, although i mean not - not ridiculous, they weren't really authoritarians or anything but. um no, i would say uh it was likely different, yeah.  : yeah -laughter- it's really funny. um well you know like any kid at that age, i would sort of watch tv afterschool but that was kind of boring. i hated cartoons. but i um - as i child i was a little different from everyone else. i would actually do math problems for fun. -laugh- : um let's see what else did i do. i liked to ride my bike and swim and hang out with friends like most people.  : well i think the most obvious thing is that both of my parents were professors, and i am a professor married to a professor. : it's probably something going on there as a way of role modeling. um i always assumed that women could do absolutely anything men could do, it was just - it was just an assumption. it wasn't even like - my dad did the laundry and my mother was a professor. you know they were complete equals. and - so i grew up with that internalized without even like - i didn't - we didn't even talk about it. it was – it was just uh - it was just accepted. so um - so i think that was probably very empowering, um just the assumption that i could do anything.  : i have a sister. : um... yeah. um my sister um - she has an md but she doesn’t practice medicine. she - she likes to do a lot of crafts actually. but um she doesn’t - she's very different from me in the particular way that i feel very compelled to like publish, to create enduring - in the way that i think about - like enduring creative contributions that you know you can point to and – and they're there. my sister is perfectly happy to just do it for her own self and not really care if anyone else notices -laughter-. my father is an interesting character because he - while his job was being a professor of microbiology at a medical school, he performed in musical theater as - he would have been an actor if that had been a way to - but you couldn't - like he was a child of the depression, you couldn't count on that as a way of making an income. so i grew up running lines with him and watching him on the stage and, so definitely he was a wonderfully creative character, um. : and my mother was a professor of microbiology and less obviously creative i would say. she told me one time that the only thing she was good at was taking tests. : obviously it couldn’t have really been true but, yeah i think it was true, it's just not that that was the only thing that –inaudible, 7:30- -laugh-, so. : without question - ok there's two but there's clearly one that's more significant than the other. so without question, raising two children while still being two careers is i mean nearly impossible. i also overcame cancer, that is a distant second. interview: oh: -laughter- : -laughter- with great difficulty.  : -laughter- ugh, ugh um, don't make me cry.  : maybe that’s why i'm so proud of them. um... -sigh- how did we do it. we struggled - i mean we could've - it would have been easier if we'd had more money but we didn’t have that much money so it was hard to find adequate child care and uh, how did we do it, just because we had no choice. i mean just because –inaudible, 8:45- everyday and did what you had to do because you had to. we had - ok i will say this, by the time the kids were in school, i feel like the secret to what made me be able to do this, you can see it in my -inaudible, 9:59- actually is when we hired more domestic help. i feel like hiring people to clean the house, cook dinner, drive the kids around, like just hiring - we had no money but we just spent all of it on that. freeing up - freeing up our time for the only two things that only we could do and no one else could do for us. someone else can cut the lawn, someone else can clean the house, somebody else can cook dinner, somebody else can drive your kid from one place to another, but there are only two things we can do that no one else can do and that is your work and your - you know spend actually time doing stuff with you kids. not driving them one place to another, but actually travelling the world with them or attending their performances or you know whatever. so i think that’s how we did it ultimately was to just say, "ok we're going to spend all our money on hire people to do the stuff that you know, we would rather not spend time doing."  : … ye - uh yeah.  : -laugh- oh not a yes or no question. yeah so um well... um... well i uh - i work in science and i do research mostly, not much teaching and um we have a long-standing project uh that i've been working on for a very long time, and we had a paper that was a little outside the box, and then in response to that, i got an application to my lab of someone in hong kong who wanted to come do a fulbright fellowship in my lab and he had made a really striking discovery or observation. and he was really not in a position in hong kong to pursue it very much. he applied to my lab because he saw our outside of the box kind of paper and our expertise and um he applied to my lab. and that has turned into a very significant project in my lab and resulted in me winning a very big award called the pioneer award that is $2.5 million to pursue it, so. : the pioneer award\ : well, it's interesting because it wasn’t so much an idea as it was an observation.  : he had observed - he had observed that something that people had not – well it turns out other people had observed it but people had not focused on before, which is - is that cells that are on the brink of death can sort of bounce back and survive.  : and this was - most people didn’t follow it up because they - i don't know - most people didn’t follow it up who had seen it. there were a few little publications in minor journals that were ignored. there were a lot of people who said that this wasn't really possible. and what - but i looked at the data and i thought it was really compelling and so it inspired me to asked a lot of questions first of all to try to figure out if it was really true or not and um. and then once i was convinced it was really true i just thought, well what fun. this is a really – this is a really crazy idea and let's - let's see if we can follow it up and learn more about it. and we're still doing that, you known it’s a big part of the lab. and uh - and it's led to some really pretty exciting things, so yeah.  : i think a lot people would have - would have not honestly had the courage to follow it up because it seemed against the grain. like against the authorities and seals or whatever, but i don’t really care about that. : it was definitely – it was taking - it was taking a risk.  : sure : -laugh- almost everyday. -laughter- : … -sigh- um well, it depends, it depends. so i get asked this a lot because now that i'm fifty-four years old and i've raised a family and gotten to a place that... pretty cool place to be um. uh a lot of young people ask me that, but they're usually talking about work life balance. is that what you're talking about - are you talking about just achieving something in work?  : but this one's more about, yeah. : okay, so i do think about this and i think um i see the most successful people in my arena being people - because we're scientists okay, we're not artists, we are scientists. um we have to get down into the nitty gritty details of experiments and we have to be looking at things with a really critical eye, and on a day to day basis things can be kind of frustrating and experiments cannot work that well. but we have to get down into the nitty gritty but we also have to be able to now zoom out to the twenty-thousand foot view and be able to communicate these very complicated ideas to anybody. and by anybody i mean other scientists, but also you know maybe to the general public, -inaudible, 15:35- or whatever and i feel like the most successful people in my arena are people who can deal with the technical details, but can also zoom out and see the big picture and communicate that effectively in writing, orally, and as well as you know being able to have the quantitative ability to deal with the data. so that’s the complexity of it. so what i would tell people in terms of advice is make sure you're doing all of that. like zoom in, zoom out all the time because you have to be – you can make the most earth shattering discovery there is but if you can't communicate it effectively to someone else in both writing and orally, it's going to be lost on the world. : ah... i think it's gotten sort of richer but you know with experience, but i wouldn't say that there's - inaudible, 16:43- big shift. : well, i mean i - i have never collaborated with my husband because he is six and a half years older than i am and so he was sort of more - he was a more senior to me and i thought it was more important for me to establish my own identity and not just be seen as somebody working for him. so we've actually never collaborated. uh we talk everyday, we talk about our work you know, communicate and advise one another and everything and never did that. so i do think you have to establish your own - your own identity early on. i think that's – yeah, you definitely have to do that. but um... but science is really kind of much more social than people probably think you know –laugh-, so. it's important to bounce ideas off other people and get feedback as much as possible and uh learn from other people. yeah. : … ah that's interesting, that’s interesting. well i can tell you... i think that i face that question actually all the time um... and... the best is if you can work on the periphery and make it a leading idea. that’s absolutely the best. um it can take a long time to do that. that is kind of what i've done i would say. um but i think either one can actually be successful, it takes -  you have to be very confident to jump into the middle of what is currently a hot topic, because you're going to be competing with a lot of people for uh all kinds of resources, and so that’s pretty hard. so if you're very confident and you have the right background and you have kind of unique angle, then that can be uh a very quick way to get to the top of the field. if you maybe aren't quite that bold or don’t maybe have a unique tool to bring to bare, you need perspective so that you - it's gonna be hard to stand out from the crowd, um and i think it's definitely better to be uh working on something that they haven't – i mean i can tell - i've been to meetings where uh my talk was the only one that used uh fruit flies as a model -inaudible, ~19:23-, i've worked on fruit flies a whole lot. and my talk – that helped me stand out. um or i've been on a - seen grant review panels where you know the leading hot thing of today or whatever, every grant is on that. and then the one that's on something else stands out so i would say i - again - you can make either one work. but when you're in the middle of the hottest topic, you've got to be the best one in the group. -laughter- : values? : well personal values to me are things like honesty and stuff where in my line of work we need to –inaudible, 20:10- -laughter- : um so you need to bring that to work, so uh i think personal values hold a pretty strong place in my line of work.  : … why is it important for whom? : like for a student, or? : uh, i mean... i guess... well ok so i mean i do teach a class of a hundred and sixty undergraduates and i - about the field and i tell them i really want them to understand where – there is a number of things i want them to understand. i want them to understand how you evaluate the evidence that supports an idea and to take that into their whole life, not just in science but, you know how do you know if there are weapons of mass destruction in iraq? somebody presents you with a bunch of evidence and you look at it and you go, "that doesn’t look like good evidence to me" –laugh-. you know, and you have to be able to evaluate evidence, how do you evaluate uh, you know, so i'm trying to teach them to think analytically about things. so that’s one reason it's important. another reason is that we have a current revolution in regenerative medicine and this grew out of my field which was just people who had no particular goal in mind. they wanted to understand how embryos developed, and how cells build embryos, and how genes work in cells to build embryos. and they just wanted to understand it because it just seemed so miraculous and so incomprehensible and so just impossible. and then gene by gene, cell by cell, the field figured it out and low and behold that leads to a revolution in regenerative medicine, and stem cells and all this stuff, and i want people to understand where these revolutions come from. they don’t come necessarily from somebody who's setting out to create regenerative medicine, they come from people who are curiosity driven just trying to understand how the natural world works, and it turns out when you understand how it works, you learn how to manipulate it and you can do that to your advantage. so i think those are all really important ideas and also want - i teach my students how to communicate complicated information to the general public, just to everybody. i give them like an essay they have to write where they're writing to someone who doesn’t have all the technical background and they'll try to communicate their ideas, so. : um... uh... so - i mean you start out doing - i mean for me anyway -inaudible, 23:29- what i did was uh... you know i was looking for a profession because i enjoy being productive. like it would be very hard for me to be a stay home mom or something like that, that would just be really hard for me to do. i enjoy producing things that i can hold in my hand or see online or whatever, i like to produce things. so then you select a profession where you think it suits your abilities and one for me, an important consideration was that it would not, you know it would change everyday, it would never be the – you know everything would change all the time, so it would be always interesting, it could never get dull. and then, that turns out to be a super - the one i chose is a very challenging profession, so you work really hard on it. i mean sometimes it's not that fun when you're faced with a really difficult situation that you know you have a pain in the ass person or you have - you have to compete for grant money and maybe - maybe you're going not to succeed, and then you worry your whole career might come to an end, so there's times when it's like super stressful. so i wouldn't say i enjoy it every single day, but i'm still doing it because now i've got a family, and i've gotta pay the bills -laughing-. -inaudible, 24:39- responsibilities there, right? you know there are certainly days when you want to walk away from it. but, you know so it's - i mean it's very - those two things are very intertwined. you - you - i created a world in which i have a great deal of responsibility. but i mean i made that happen, and that makes me feel valued. so, -sign- you know and i selected a profession that i would enjoy more than other professions. i don’t even know how to answer that question. : -laughing- well, i was in my parents' lab when i was a toddler so um i - but i would say that when i went to college i didn't – i never intended to become my mother that’s for sure. but uh like anyone else, but um – but i went to college and i was interested in philosophy and i realized that after six philosophy classes that we were still asking the same questions we've asked for the last five thousand years and no one has ever answered any of them, so it sort of like seemed like a dead end. and in science what - and you know i have some aptitude for it but also, you could ask a smaller question but you could get a definitive answer. and i really, really um got committed to uh what i wanted to do when i took a class in neuroscience at [university 1: where the participant took classes], and my teacher was so inspiring and i just loved - fell in love with the idea of being able to explain something seemingly really complicated by a very simple elegant molecular mechanism. and that's - that’s it. that’s what crystallized it. it wasn’t really working in my parents' lab. i was exposed to science by working in my parents' lab, but i actually thought it was kind of boring. what really crystallized my interest was this exposure to the idea that you could explain how electrical signals travel through the cells of your brain by the simple balance of ion concentrations on either side of the cell membrane. it was just like totally mind-blowing, so.  : … yes, but well, more - more frequently at the beginning when i was under a great deal of stress with the little kids and everything. it would be more - there were more lunch time conversations with my husband where i'm like, "i don't know if i can keep doing this". and it's like look, somedays it's just gonna be a job, just get up, go to work, pretend it’s a job instead of like your life, because for us it's our life, you know. and just somedays just you know it might take a week, just get up, go to work, pretend you're working at the grocery store or whatever, you know -laugh-. and that sort of was a good -  that was a good psychological tool sometimes. but much less frequently you know as time went on, the kids - you know the stress has got less and we got more help and the kids got older, and all of that i would say i've had very few of those days.  : well, it had to do - well - so the way science works - i mean i don’t know - who are you? -laugh-  : are you a scientist?  : -laughter- ok. cause i don't know. like am i talking to an artist? : ok i don't know who i'm talking to, so. tell me who you are and then i'll answer your question. -laugh- : so you're\ : ok : like phd? : ok... in like - in what area\ : ok cool... um what was the question, oh yeah when do i feel like that. um so – as then as you know, um or maybe not depending on what your experience has been, the way this usually works is you have some exciting hypothesis you come up with, this great idea and that's really fun, and then you go to the lab, and you design all these experiments and people work on them and they fail most of the time, and then sometimes they succeed and then the answer comes out really messy and it's nothing like your beautiful original idea and it's that day -laughter- that you're like, -sigh- "i don't know if i can keep doing this because it's too hard, you know i'm never right, and - and uh... it's just not fun. or maybe you know – maybe there's some personal problems between some people in the lab or maybe one of those people - you know whatever people just cause problems or whatever. and yeah – and then maybe the kid was up all night or sick and, you know everything else and you just feel like it's all too hard and you can't keep going. -laugh- : right so um - yeah i complain – i complain to my husband and we have lunch together everyday so i guess i should say that's part of my secret is that - that’s another piece of advice i give to students all the time is, you need a completely one hundred percent supportive spouse. like that’s the only way this is ever gonna work. -laugh- and uh you know we pick each other up and um - and yeah if you're feeling down then um... you know they'll say - ah he'll say - i can hear it in my ears. it hasn’t happened probably in like 20 years but i can hear him say, 'every time you feel like this - like i bet you tomorrow some great result is gonna come in. like it'll - it won't even take that long. it'll just be tomorrow or maybe next day, or maybe it'll be after lunch, you know. -inaudible, 31:03- great results is gonna come in and you'll be bouncing off the walls and all excited and it will all be fine and, you know, he's right, it does.  : it comes up and it works out.  : mh hm. : … um my husband.  : -laugh- so, guess i anticipated that question. um uh obviously um my - like i said my parents set up some kind of just internal role modeling that i was unaware of and uh - and then my husband and i are, you know we have - we have offices and labs next door to each other and we always have. so um uh - at two different institutions and through several different moves and - or it even - yeah i mean uh three different institutions. so um... so uh definitely can um... i mean you know you have a continual stream of students and post docs and technicians coming through, um each one of whom influences you and teaches you something. uh but in terms of just like key individuals, yeah parents and husband. : right. yeah so from my parents i learned that i could be anything i wanted to be. i learned - i learned about, you know i could see what academic life looked like i guess um and i learned all those all-important values. they are outstanding people. um, from my husband, yeah -laugh- - so my husband, is an interesting character. he grew up in spanish harlem, it was the only white kid in his school and had not enough food to eat. and the chances of him achieving what he has achieved were very very slim to none. and - so he is one of the most determined -laugh- uh people you will ever come across. um obviously, although has talents but works incredibly hard, harder than i do -inaudible, 33:45-. i work hard, but not that hard. um and so uh resilience is - i mean i have - i really believe that you're born with a certain level of resilience and we both have that so. you know you could get cancer, go through chemotherapy, and just get up everyday and be okay. like remarkably like i'm not even depressed, i just need to get through this. it's a challenge, it's one more thing you gotta do, you know. it’s a bummer, no it's not fair, but there you go, who said it would be fair. um and uh - so you're born with a certain level of that, but then you can cultivate it too and and. yeah so he's a great example of someone whose incredibly determined and resilient and uh - and if you can overcome that kind of challenge, well then everything else should be easy by comparison -laugh-. : … i think i have a pretty good idea.  : um... i have a pretty good idea but i would say it's not gonna be perfect like any prediction system. it's going to be accurate some percentage of the time. and so i would say i'm probable accurate... ninety five percent of the time.  : but um, so yeah. i mean, you know, there's a certain set of characteristics you need to succeed in what i do and i told you what some of them are. obviously you need a certain level of intellectual ability, you need a certain level of hard work, you need a certain level of oral communication skills, certain level of written communication skills. you need a certain level of understanding your own strengths and weaknesses so that you can develop and compen – you know learn to make up for your weaknesses. no one is perfect. work on the things that you're weak at. if you have a very poor self-awareness, this is a bad sigh -laughter-. and i've had a few people like that you know, this is - that’s probably the worst indicator is if somebody doesn’t have a good ability to self-assess. um some people are super hard on themselves in terms of self-assessment and that’s ok you can - you can - those people are fun to mentor because you get to be the cheerleader all the time. the people that are no fun to mentor are the people who have too high opinion of themselves. then, there just - they're just awful. -inaudible, 36:41-36:44-. but uh you know, and so you don’t have to be like the top one percent at all of those things, but you need - you probably need to be in the top five or ten percent of a good fraction of those things, and aware enough to compensate where you're missing. so that’s how i evaluate people and um yeah, i have a former student who literally on the intellectual ability, i would have put in the bottom twenty percent of people i interact with, and she's a professor at duke university and she's doing great. -laugh- so, but she's very self-aware and very good at everything else. so you know, it's great. i'm delighted. : … uh -sigh-... yes. um, i only hesitate because... so it's easy to see the people who are naturally creative. it's harder to tell - i mean people can become more creative, because to be creative you have to be kind of confident, right? you have to be willing to say something that you haven't heard said before, to put two ideas together, and if you're not very confident, then it's gonna to be hard for you to be creative. and people, especially women, can definitely gain confidence tremendously by leaps and bounds from twenty to thirty to forty if they're - if they're doing well. you know and so - so i - so people - so can i predict everyone whose going to be creative? no. because somebody might be - like i have a student in my lab right now who's just like super super shy and she could really evolve. i was - i was really really shy as a child and as you can tell i'm not so shy anymore. and um - and so she may come out of her shell and end up being really creative, but i couldn’t tell that right now. on the other hand, i have an undergrad student in my lab whose the most brilliant -laugh- undergrad i've ever seen and is really great, and i would make a very strong prediction that he'll do creative work, so.  : … uh yeah, it's funny it's like i answered the next question. : -laugh- um yeah so uh... yes i see men being a lot more confident much earlier on. and um sometimes that helps them and sometimes it hurts them. so it's not necessarily uh always a good thing, it's mostly a good thing um. it's mostly helpful to people when they're confident, but only if they're confident in proportion to their abilities. um and uh so i see that, what else do i see. um... i think that might be the only real difference. um yeah i think that’s the only thing i would generalize about. : … well i think it's been kind of studied uh... i think it’s a combination of testosterone and cultural norms -laughter-. uh but i - you know i don't - i don't really know um because i haven't - i don’t really evaluate psychology research, so i don’t really know very much about how good any of these studies are um. um so i don’t really know if the studies that say oh you know the teachers call on boys a lot more than they call on girls. you know i don’t know if that’s accurate or if that's meaningful or if that's important. it could be, it's possible, but that’s the kind of things that leads boys to be more confident, or the way their parents treat them, or you know - or i mean i know when i was a little girl, um -sigh- i remember so clearly when i was like ten that boys prefer to girls who acted a little bit stupid. and uh i remember so clearly and i had this one friend who was very attractive to boys because she acted all silly, and there was no way i was gonna do that -laughter- : like just not gonna do that. um -laughter- and uh but you know, you pay the price, so i paid a price in popularity, so um i was willing to play that price that maybe plenty of girls weren't, so. you know, i don't know. it could be – i think there are plenty of social - i don't know maybe times have changed, i hope, maybe not, maybe we're going backwards. um but uh, yeah, i don't know, but i do think that testosterone has a –inaudible, 42:07-. : hire domestic help even when you don’t think you need it. -laughter- : it will pay back - it will pay back over and over and over again. i'm one of the highest paid women on this campus because i spent all that money.  : have my what? : peers? : oh sure uh. yeah, absolutely.  : i was at [university 2: where the participant worked] for twenty years before i moved to [university 3: where the participant works now] four years ago. and um – and we had a cohort of young women faculty who we all worked on either fruit flies or worms or like simple model and systems. and we were - i don't know if they felt this way, but i felt like we an awful lot alike. it was like a little sisterhood you know. it wasn't all - don't get me wrong, we were competitive i mean we had to - because we were all trying to make our way in a very competitive field at a competitive institution. and it wasn't – you know - so especially at the very beginning, you couldn’t be sure that you were all going to make it. we did all make it but you couldn’t really be sure about that. and so i wouldn’t say that we were - you know we had our - we were competing for students for example. like to get the best students into your lab, you know. so they weren't purely like family, support kind of thing because they were also your colleagues and competitors. it was complicated but i feel like at least it was... they definitely felt like a peer group. and ultimately, we all did do very well and now we're all very... it's much more simple to be in a friendly relationship and there's no competition left because we're all where we need to be. -laugh- and then i had peers that i would meet at meetings, conferences, and things like that. they were role models for me who are inspiring, um leaders in the field and both men and women. but it's interesting to me that... women have been very important. my women peers have been very important to me. i get along equally well i feel like with my professional colleagues who are men or women, um but it is important to have a cohort that you feel like yeah we're all alike. : … -laugh- no one has ever asked me that question before. my goodness -laugh-…  so i'm an idea person, like ideas are exciting to me. like probably the most exciting thing that can happen to me in a week is for me to get a new idea. so that’s like a reward for having new ideas. so right, where do ideas come from? it's hard to answer the general question so let me just think of a specific idea. a specific idea that i'm very excited about right now came from hearing scientists that i respect a lot give a talk that put forward a really brand new idea that i've not heard before. and it sounded really like a cosmically new idea and i just like fell in love with it, i thought it was great. and then i came back to the lab and thought is there anywhere - are there any phenomenon that we're studying that this sort of mechanism would potentially explain or contribute to or anything like that because it was such a cool idea. so i think one of the most exciting ideas in the lab right now and one that we're testing and pursuing is sort of combining this cool observations -inaudible- with this other cool mechanism that might help them do that. but the context in which that was described was completely different, it had nothing to do with those, but - so i guess putting disparate observations - yeah that's it – it's putting two seemingly unrelated ideas together into one unifying idea. that's kind of what i do. : -inaudible- : well i do think that um... uh i do think that the ability to zoom out and look for disparate connections is something that not necessarily everyone does equally well. and or i wanted to say well because not everyone wants to do it. one of the reasons i'm way happier in the department i'm in right now than i was at john hopkins was because i was in a biological chemistry department where people tended to focus on what i consider to be minutia and they never zoomed out. it drove me kind of - it was not a good fit for me. and here, i feel like i'm in - much more frequently i find myself in the company of people who like to do what i do, which is to sort of explore broader ideas and i think that's where you have the opportunity to put together two desperate thoughts. you have to first be thinking - you have to be exploring a larger space of ideas to begin with, to take two things that seem unrelated and put them together. so you have to find that interesting and worthwhile. and some people, you know they love to dive down into the depths of details of about how something works and that’s valuable too, it's just different. i think that a person who might make a brilliant discovery in how ion channels open and close is going to be somebody whose more into the depth of mechanism. someone who figures out how cells live and die, that’s like a different level of zoom. so i think it's just uh – i think it's - we need all these different kinds of people taking their different kinds of approaches for sure. but it's just what i enjoy doing is like thinking broadly, reading broadly, listening broadly to lots of different subject matter and lots of different ideas at many different levels of details. and then that gives you the opportunity to put two things together that otherwise someone else might never find - never see them fit together.  : well uh i don’t think the kind of work that we do is ever really completed. so every project we do, we might answer some questions and raise several more. and so one way is just to sort of naturally follow the questions that come up, but then there's another way which is one of the approaches that we take, which is fun, is to do unbiased screens for things and you just never know where this is gonna lead you. so for example we like to study - we want to understand how cells move, not just how cells live and die, and so we might do - we might create a whole bunch of mutant strains of drosophila that lack one particular gene function and ask if cell movement is defective or not. and then we collect those and then will follow up and try to find out which gene it is that's been mutated. and since we have no idea going into this what it's going to be, it could be anything. and that could send us off in some whole new direction that we were never expecting to go in. and that happened repeatedly. and then you have to master a whole new area of science and you know take it in a new direction, so sometimes we do that, and um but sometimes we'll just take something that people already think is really interesting and look at it in a different way – um look at it in a different context, try to analyze it, learn someone new about something that people already think they know a lot of about, but teach them something new about it.  : … um... well obviously -inaudible- rationality is very very important -inaudible-. so rationality is very important. so then the question is really, is there a place for intuition? yeah sure, but what is intuition? intuition is really just a subconscious putting together of disparate ideas that you have encountered based on your experiences and what you’ve read and seen. so intuition is really just a subconscious version. hopefully it's not completely irrational, but its subconscious. so um as a scientist i feel like we try to bring as much of that up to the conscious level as possible, but still we have a gut feeling sometimes that this or that is going to turn out to be right. it's pressed at best. most of the time someone could say why they have that feeling, but really it's pressed. : well in my line of work, the first thing i have to do is convince someone in my lab that they want to work on it -laugh-. so the first thing i have to do is persuade someone else that it's an interesting idea. i mean when you first have an idea you probably go through the literature and look, try to see if anyone's done this before, if there's some data that's maybe not well referenced, it's maybe something people don’t pay much attention to but it still supports your idea. so you sort of look in literature and try to figure out if there's any existing evidence for it. you try to think it through, "well if this is true, what else might be true", and sort of try to vet it a little bit. and then if you think it has some legs, then you talk to somebody in the lab and think about, "well ok this is an interesting idea. if this is our hypothesis how would we go about testing it? what's the most efficient way? what first experiment we should do that's gonna tell us yes or no, right or wrong, productive or not productive line of investigation. let's not beat around the bush and do twenty experiments that only hint. let's really try to cut to the chase and get to the one that’s going to tell us a definitive answer. even if that answer is no, like a definitive no is way better than a mushy yes. so that’s kind of how we do it.  : uh i - in my line of work, i don’t have any choice. i work in a team because - well that’s not entirely true, i mean there are a few people who just work by themselves, but no i totally prefer to work in a team. a team - but a team where we're not all equal -laughter-. : that evolved. so i'm having more fun with that right now than i've ever have in my career. of course in the beginning you have to establish yourself as independent, so it's really important to be able to run your own show and do your own thing. but then the more senior you get, the more fun it is to reach out and collaborate with people because it extends your capabilities so much. you can collaborate with people who have expertise that you don’t have, who have access to technical skills that you don't have, who have access to equipment that you don’t have, who have – so you can build a team that can do something that no individual can do. so that’s the fun part of collaborating. within the lab, we have - lately because my lab is much bigger than it's ever been before, we build – we sort of build these collaborative teams within the lab and we have these subgroup meetings every week, and within that group knows what everyone else is doing, and we provide advice and share reagents and. so it creates this wonderful sense of cooperation and collaboration within the group. but in terms of collaborating outside my lab, it's usually because i come across someone else's work and i think it's really exciting and high quality and i can see how it might relate to what i'm doing. and so then i send them an email and i say i'm so and so and here's my idea, i think it would be very fun. what do you think? and then usually they're interested in collaborating.  : ... i don't know if you mean like hour to hour or if you mean like year to year? or if you mean -laugh- : yeah exactly, so i'll give those answers, so um... i am very efficient. so i get a lot done, and the way that i do that is with exquisite time management. so i have a calendar that is really filled out. you can look two weeks ahead of time and it looks empty, but the time monday arrives, almost every hour of every day is scheduled in some way. -inaudible- blocking off three hours to work on something or it might be scheduled with - or it might be scheduled with meetings with other people or with some administrative task or teaching something or whatever. but so - so, i have during a day, usually very concrete goals in mind of what i want to get done during that day. now on a larger scale, no, we're kind of nimble. you tell everybody you have to change your ideas according to the new facts that come in, so we're not... banging our head on some particular wall or goal and we have a great diversity of things going on. so i would say on longer time scales there's a lot more flexibility to what we're doing. : … i'm sort of... very strict about time management and that includes scheduling time. i tell other people this. when i have students who come in who are struggling in my class, i tell them about time management and they're often taking four classes and working a job, and doing this and doing that. and i'm like, "do you see my calendar, you gotta make one of these". -laugh- but you have to schedule exercise and sleep and like all those other things that keep you healthy because you're not going to be – it's not going to do you any good to - if you're not getting enough sleep and you're not eating well and you're not exercising, you're not taking at least a little bit of time everyday to like relax and do something that’s enjoyable to you um then you're not – you're going to get left -inaudible-, so. it's very analytical, but it works -laugh-. : so, i love it when i'm not teaching because i don’t have an alarm that goes off and i sleep exactly as much as i need to, which is typically 9 hours. i know it's a lot and i'm sure i could live a whole another life if i didn’t need to sleep that much, but that is what i need to feel really good and function efficiently.  : teaching? well i still give myself eight because i just get kind of miserable if i have to go on less than that for very long. i can go a day or two with only seven, but i really get kind of unhappy -laugh-. : um, i definitely do not do my best work late at night. i prefer to work first thing when i wake up is good. but i'm pretty functional. i'm not like an early, early riser and i'm pretty functional most of the day, i really just get tired - actually if i stay in my office i can work until midnight, but if i go home i immediately wind down and get tired, so um. : no : i'm very focused -laugh- : … i don't think so. in sometimes you might just be tired. you know i'm thinking of these like subgroup meetings that we have. sometimes they're just really really fun, um and sometimes you're just sort of - they feel a little bit draining, and i think it's just uh – i think it's a physical state actually more than mental state.  : hm... that changed since the kids have grown up. uh it used to be – and i'm thinking about this now because there used to be this hard stop to the work day when you would go home and eat dinner and hang out with the kids in the evening, and that hard stop is gone. and so i do still have a dog at home and we do have to go home for him. and when i go home i get tired, i don’t keep working. my husband will work, like he'll just work incessantly. i think he's over worked. but - so how many hours a day? um... well... i would say... somewhere between... somewhere between nine and fourteen depending on the day. and often times when we get - but at the same time, not it won't be nine or fourteen on the weekend absolutely not. saturday morning i go to yoga religiously and then to the farmers market and then we have a picnic, so saturday - and then we walk the dog on the beach. and so saturday, it's hard to get any work done on a saturday. sunday is more possible to get work done. but then from time to time i travel a lot for work and you know i could take a fifteen hour plane ride and work for twelve hours of the fifteen hours. but then i could also have another one where maybe i just read a book.  : i think yoga is very important for erasing the blackboard -laughter-, so. i know some people - some people might meditate or whatever, but for me ninety minutes of extreme physical activity followed by five minutes of resting quietly is about the right ratio -laughter-. if i were just to meditate for twenty minutes that would just drive me insane. i do feel like it's really important to just uh - because i work pretty intensely and i can concentrate very effectively. so i can work a really intense long days and then i need to go to yoga just to kinda erase the blackboard. i'll go into yoga feeling like i'm so tired, i'm just going to have to nap the rest of the afternoon and then i'll come out of yoga feeling totally ready, energized to do anything in the world.  : … uh not especially.  : you mean like if a person invents a whole bunch of stuff, like if they invent twenty things they're more likely to hit on one really creative one? : uh yeah. i mean i don't know how to answer that because i go to work everyday, so that's a lot of days. so if you want to add it up by the days, certainly the more days you spend doing something the more likely you are to hit paydirt. so i think it does in a sense that i feel like hard work is important because it gives you more opportunities for success. and if you don’t work as hard you have fewer opportunities. yeah, it rings true in that regard. i mean, um... : um yeah, um my field quantifies my productivity in terms of number of publications. so number and quality of publications, citations, publications, -inaudible- factor, things like that. i mean i don't pay a huge amount of attention to that but.  : uh, well because they're measured, i kind of know -laughter-. yeah i mean i am doing just fine.  : i have no idea how to answer that. i think i work reasonably hard, but i think most people think they work hard even if they don’t. but like i said, my husband works harder than i do but then he's published twice as many papers, so there you go –laugh-. i mean he's six and a half years older so. but uh i don't know. but it doesn't really matter.  : oh i know i'm done with a paper when it's accepted for publication, so that's an easy one. when i'm done with a particular project and maybe i want to move on, um yeah that's when i'm maybe not so interested in it or i don't see other people being interested in it or i can't quite see my way – or i feel like we are down a little cul-de-sac. you know it's like, "ok, it was an ok idea, but it's just, you know it’s narrow, i don't see how it generalized from it, i don't see anything big coming out of it. or some technical obstacle that you just can't get around sometimes. yeah, there are different things that lead you down a little cul-de-sac you may need to get out of.  : … revise, well um. i revise the work very, very extensively until it's published and then you can't, so –laugh-. so i don't know how to answer that. i mean i feel the urge to obsessively revise until i can't anymore -laugh-. : … i think i retain information pretty well for someone who's fifty-four. -laughter- : well i mean i've - i'll take a break and go look at facebook now and then during the day. so i'm definitely not like laser focused. sure, if i took adderall i'd be more focused than i am, but - but i feel like on the scale of human focus and distractibility, i feel like i'm one of the more focused people. : … um no, i mean i can forget individual things -inaudible-. it would be a struggle if i didn't have my calendar because i have so many things on it, but –laugh- no i wouldn’t say people would - well you know it's really related to the complexity of your schedule in many ways. when i was younger and didn’t have as many things on my schedule, i wouldn't forget them and i don't think it was just because i was younger, i think it's just because my life is extremely complex right now, so every now and then something falls through the cracks, but no i don't think - i love my apple watch by the way.  : … um uninhibited. you mean just in terms of letting your mind go places where other people might not go? or inhibited like dancing on the table at the bar? -laugh- : no, well no no. definitely not the kind of girl who would dance on the bar. but in terms of... there's a balance to be struck between - i mean like i said i'm willing to entertain ideas that i think other people will reject autonomically. so i definitely think that i'm open. i don’t feel myself actively inhibiting anything in order to achieve that state. i think it's just an open – it's a state of openness that one cultivates. so yeah it doesn’t feel like an actively inhibitory process, like i have to fight against something. it just feels like um... well ok i guess maybe this is something. when my husband and i are talking about many different subjects, it used to drive him crazy that i could take every point of view in conversation on the subject because that's what i do, look at everything from every point of view. and that would be annoying to him 'cause he wanted me to take "a" point of view, but i wanted to point out what all the points of view are on some things. i guess that’s actually something i kind of do naturally or without thinking. that is part of that same thing i think. it's being open to looking at the same situation in several different ways and then being open to possibilities that haven't been articulated before. : i also don’t think i'm a creative genius by the way. -laugh- : no.  : no. : no.  : … uh, well... it's way more fun now because - but in terms of my approach, it's different mostly because my lab is much bigger. so a lot of things are possible in a bigger lab that - you know it's really great when you have this great diversity of people with different sorts of abilities. they can complement one other and it's sort of more fun. with a small number of people, you're sort of limited by their limitations. and also of course i know much better now having all the experience that i have. i can help guide people probably better and... i guess how i do my work changed more because of external circumstances more than from my internal process.  : um... just there are just more possibilities because for all kinds of reasons. like i have a certain stature in my field so i have talented people who want to work with me and i have money to pay them and i have – and so we've been working in our areas for a while so we have a lot of ideas. so there's just so many more resources available to me. which is why it's more fun. and the resources come in the form of money and space and people and ideas and you know everything. collaborators, right? everything, so that's why it's more fun. it's really because i've - i guess i feel like i've been working - i was striving all those years to get to where i am now to create this amazing environment where now i can pursue a great diversity of ideas. whereas before we were more narrow. and not because of an internal process but just because of limitations.  : ...um... yeah. i think when we started this new project that was sort of considered a paradigm shift in the field.  : what have i not asked you?  : … i'm not sure... i mean you haven't asked me if i think you can actually analyze the creative process. : you know?  : i think it's hard to analyze. and i think that's because from my perspective creativity is a very hard thing to both define and measure. and i know you all have given this a lot of thought, but i think that’s the hardest thing is defining and measuring it. and therefore that’s your biggest challenge in this study in my opinion. so um... with respect to your question, yeah i guess that’s kind of what you're asking. is there some aspect of creativity that you might have not touched on. but i don't know because i don't know what the nature of it is -laugh-. i don’t even know if i'm especially blessed in that regard. i feel like, well it's interesting that you guys - you're talking to artists and scientists and who else?  : yeah yeah yeah. : writers are really creative... musicians. for me it seems like if there is - i mean how do we know there is –inaudible- - like how do we know it’s the same thing that artists have and that scientists have. how do we know that’s the same thing? we have one word for it but maybe in another language they have two words for it.  : and so how do we know that there's something in common between artists who win an award for their art and scientists who win an award for their science? : well... i have spoken to an artist recently about it -laugh-. and... well not surprisingly there are some similarities and some differences. obviously, when you're doing science there's a right answer. and it's your job to discover. and when you're doing art, that’s not true i don’t think. and often - well at least with artists i've talked to suggests that leaving things open to interpretation in more than one way is part of the goal. so i feel like that's a pretty fundamental difference. i feel like what i'm doing is there's a puzzle. it's the puzzle of how cells work. i'm trying to solve a puzzle when i don’t even have the pieces. well maybe i have some of the pieces, but i'm probably gonna have to make up the rest and i certainly don’t have the picture on the box. and i probably only got a small fraction of the pieces and no pictures on the box and i'm trying to solve the puzzle, but there is a right answer. and i feel like that's very different than the situation that a painter is in when they're starting to paint. or – and that’s different still from a musician. technically, they're all totally different. so, i don't know, what do you think?  : really? : they're comfortable with it. : yeah. i mean i'm totally comfortable with the word "creative". i do feel like what i do is creative. i've even been heard to say that because my daughter is a writer and my daughter and son are both very competent musicians. and i even say to them, i think of what i do as more like a creative profession. it's much more like being a musician than it is like being a doctor or an engineer. i feel like that. so i definitely feel like what i do is a creative process. whether it’s the same type of creative process or whether our language is just impoverished. -laugh- it's missing the word for the special type of processes that underlie the different activities. that’s the part i'm not sure about. and so, yeah, well anyway, well good luck to you. : sure. ok well how will we find out the results of your study?  : yeah, sounds great. 